<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of London and the Kingdom - Volume I by Reginald R. Sharpe



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: London and the Kingdom - Volume I

Author: Reginald R. Sharpe

Release Date: November 13,  2006 [Ebook #19800]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
 <fileDesc>
 <titleStmt>
 <title>London and the Kingdom - Volume I</title>
 <author>Reginald R. Sharpe</author>
 </titleStmt>
 <editionStmt>
  <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
 </editionStmt>
 <publicationStmt>
 <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
 <date value="2006-11-13">November 13, 2006</date>
 <idno type="etext-no">19800</idno>
 <availability>
 <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
 with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
 away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
 License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
 </availability>
 </publicationStmt>

 <sourceDesc>
  <bibl>
  <title>London and the Kingdom</title>
  <author>Reginald R. Sharpe</author>
  <imprint>
   <pubPlace>London</pubPlace>
   <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
   <publisher>Longmans, Green &amp; Co.</publisher>
   <date>1898</date>
  </imprint>
  </bibl>
 </sourceDesc>
 </fileDesc>

 <encodingDesc>
 <classDecl>
  <taxonomy id="lc">
  <bibl>
   <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
  </bibl>
  </taxonomy>
 </classDecl>
 </encodingDesc>
 <profileDesc>
 <langUsage>
  <language id="en">English</language>
 </langUsage>
 <textClass>
  <classCode scheme="lc">
  *** <!-- LoC Class (PR, PQ, ...) -->
  </classCode>
  <keywords>
  <list>
   <!-- <item></item> any keywords for PG search engine -->
  </list>
  </keywords>
 </textClass>
 </profileDesc>
 <revisionDesc>
 <change>
  <date value="2006-11-13">November 13,  2006</date>
  <respStmt>
  <name>Paul Murray<lb /></name>
  <name>Joshua Hutchinson<lb /></name>
  <name>The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries</name>
  <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
  </respStmt>
  <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
 </change>
 </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>


<text>
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/image01.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>CHARTER OF WILLIAM I TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: CHARTER OF WILLIAM I TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON.</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/image02.png" rend="w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>CHARTER OF WILLIAM I GRANTING LANDS TO DEORMAN.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: CHARTER OF WILLIAM I GRANTING LANDS TO DEORMAN.</figDesc>
</figure>

<p></p>
</div>

<titlePage rend="page-break-before: right">
 <docTitle><titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: x-large">London and the Kingdom</titlePart><lb /><lb />
  <titlePart type="sub">A HISTORY&mdash;DERIVED MAINLY FROM THE ARCHIVES AT GUILDHALL IN THE CUSTODY OF THE CORPORATION OF THE CITY OF LONDON.</titlePart></docTitle>
 <byline><lb /><lb />By <docAuthor>REGINALD R. SHARPE, D.C.L.,</docAuthor><lb />
 RECORDS CLERK IN THE OFFICE OF THE TOWN CLERK OF THE CITY OF LONDON; EDITOR OF "CALENDAR OF WILLS ENROLLED IN THE COURT OF HUSTING," ETC.<lb /><lb />
 IN THREE VOLUMES.<lb /><lb />
 VOL. I.<lb /><lb /></byline>

<docImprint><hi rend="font-style: italic">PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE CORPORATION UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE LIBRARY COMMITTEE.</hi>
<lb /><lb />London<lb />
LONGMANS, GREEN &amp; Co.<lb />
AND NEW YORK: 15 EAST 16TH STREET.<lb /><lb /></docImprint>
<docDate>1894</docDate>
</titlePage>

<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">London:<lb />
Printed by Blades, East &amp; Blades,<lb />
23, Abchurch Lane, E.C.</hi></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="iii" /><anchor id="Pgiii" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>PREFACE.</head>

<p>Of the numerous works that have been written
on London, by which I mean more especially
the City of London, few have been devoted to an
adequate, if indeed any, consideration of its political
importance in the history of the Kingdom. The
history of the City is so many-sided that writers
have to be content with the study of some particular
phase or some special epoch. Thus we have those
who have concentrated their efforts to evolving
out of the remote past the municipal organization
of the City. Their task has been to unfold the
origin and institution of the Mayoralty and Shrievalty
of London, the division of the City into wards with
Aldermen at their head, the development of the
various trade and craft guilds, and the respective
powers and duties of the Courts of Aldermen and
Common Council, and of the Livery of London
assembled in their Common Hall. Others have
devoted themselves to the study of the ecclesiastical
and monastic side of the City's history&mdash;its Cathedral,
its religious houses, and hundred and more parish<pb n="iv" /><anchor id="Pgiv" />
churches, which occupied so large an extent of the
City's area. The ecclesiastical importance of the City,
however, is too often ignored. "We are prone,"
writes Bishop Stubbs, "in examining into the municipal
and mercantile history of London, to forget
that it was a very great ecclesiastical centre."
Others, again, have confined themselves to depicting
the every-day life of the City burgess, his social condition,
his commercial pursuits, his amusements; whilst
others have been content to perpetuate the memory
of streets and houses long since lost to the eye,
and thus to keep alive an interest in scenes and
places which otherwise would be forgotten.</p>

<p>The political aspect of the City's history has
rarely been touched by writers, and yet its geographical
position combined with the innate courage
and enterprise of its citizens served to give it no
small political power and no insignificant place in
the history of the Kingdom. This being the case,
the Corporation resolved to fill the void, and in
view of the year 1889 being the 700th Anniversary
of the Mayoralty of London&mdash;according to popular
tradition&mdash;instructed the Library Committee to prepare
a work showing "the pre-eminent position
occupied by the City of London and the important
function it exercised in the shaping and making of
England."</p>

<pb n="v" /><anchor id="Pgv" />

<p>It is in accordance with these instructions that
this and succeeding volumes have been compiled.
As the title of the work has been taken from a
chapter in Mr. Loftie's book on London ("Historic
Towns" series, chap. ix), so its main features are
delineated in that chapter. "It would be interesting"&mdash;writes
Mr. Loftie&mdash;"to go over all the
recorded instances in which the City of London
interfered directly in the affairs of the Kingdom.
Such a survey would be the history of England
as seen from the windows of the Guildhall." No
words could better describe the character of the
work now submitted to the public. It has been
compiled mainly from the City's own archives.
The City has been allowed to tell its own story.
If, therefore, its pages should appear to be too
much taken up with accounts of loans advanced
by the City to impecunious monarchs or with
wearisome repetition of calls for troops to be raised
in the City for foreign service, it is because the
City's records of the day are chiefly if not wholly
concerned with these matters. If, on the other
hand, an event which may be rightly deemed of
national importance be here omitted, it is because
the citizens were little affected thereby, and the
City's records are almost, if not altogether, silent on
the subject.</p>

<pb n="vi" /><anchor id="Pgvi" />

<p>The work does not affect to be a critical history
so much as a <hi rend="font-style: italic">chronique pour servir</hi>, to which the
historical student may have recourse in order to learn
what was the attitude taken up by the citizens of
London at important crises in the nation's history.
He will there see how, in the contest between
Stephen and the Empress Matilda, the City of
London held as it were the balance; how it helped
to overthrow the tyranny of Longchamp, and to
wrest from the reluctant John the Great Charter of
our liberties; how it was with men and money
supplied by the City that Edward III and Henry V
were enabled to conquer France, and how in after
years the London trained bands raised the siege of
Gloucester and turned the tide of the Civil War in
favour of Parliament. He will not fail to note the
significant fact that before Monk put into execution
his plan for restoring Charles II to the Crown, the
taciturn general&mdash;little given to opening his mind to
anyone&mdash;deemed it advisable to take up his abode
in the City in order to first test the feelings of the
inhabitants as to whether the Restoration would be
acceptable to them or not. He will see that the
citizens of London have at times been bold of speech
even in the presence of their sovereign when the
cause of justice and the liberty of the subject were at
stake, and that they did not hesitate to suffer for<pb n="vii" /><anchor id="Pgvii" />
their opinions; that, "at many of the most critical
periods of our history, the influence of London
and its Lord Mayors has turned the scale in
favour of those liberties of which we are so justly
proud"; and that had the entreaties of the City
been listened to by the King and his ministers, the
American Colonies would never have been lost to
England.</p>

<p>There are two Appendices to the work; one
comprising copies from the City's Records of letters,
early proclamations and documents of special interest
to which reference is made in the text; the other
consisting of a more complete list of the City's
representatives in Parliament from the earliest times
than has yet been printed, supplemented as it has
been by returns to writs recorded in the City's
archives and (apparently) no where else. The returns
for the City in the Blue Books published in
1878 and 1879 are very imperfect.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">R. R. S.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Guildhall, London</hi>,<lb />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">April, 1894.</hi></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>Contents</head>
<divGen type="toc" />
</div>

</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="001" /><anchor id="Pg001" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="THE PORT OF LONDON." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">The greatness of London. How far due to its geographical position.</note>

<p>The wealth and importance of the City of London
are due to a variety of causes, of which its geographical
position must certainly be esteemed not the least.
The value of such a noble river as the Thames was
scarcely over-estimated by the citizens when, as the
story goes, they expressed to King James their comparative
indifference to his threatened removal of
himself, his court and parliament, from London, if
only their river remained to them. The mouth of the
Thames is the most convenient port on the westernmost
boundary of the European seaboard, and ships
would often run in to replenish their tanks with the
sweet water for which it was once famous.<note place="foot"><p>Strype remarks of Thames water that it "did sooner become fine
and clear than the New River water, and was ever a clearer water."&mdash;Strype,
Stow's Survey, ed. 1720, bk. i, p. 25. Another writer
speaks of "that most delicate and serviceable ryver of Thames."&mdash;Howes's
Chron., p. 938.</p></note></p>

<p>After the fall of the Western Empire (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 476),
commercial enterprise sprang up among the free towns
of Italy. The carrying trade of the world's merchandise
became centred for a time in Venice, and
that town led the way in spreading the principles of
commerce along the shores of the Mediterranean,
being closely followed by Genoa, Florence, and Pisa.
The tide, which then set westward, and continued its
course beyond the Pillars of Hercules, was met in
later years by another stream of commerce from the<pb n="002" /><anchor id="Pg002" />
shores of the Baltic.<note place="foot"><p>During Edgar's reign (958-975), the foreign trade of the City had
increased to such a degree, and notably with a body of German
merchants from the Eastern shores of the Baltic, called "Easterlings"
(subsequently known as the Hanse Merchants of the Steel-yard), that
his son and successor Ethelred drew up a code of laws for the purpose
of regulating it.</p></note> Small wonder, then, if the City
of London was quick to profit by the continuous
stream of traffic passing and repassing its very door,
and vindicated its title to be called&mdash;as the Venerable
Bede had in very early days called it the Emporium
of the World.<note place="foot"><p>"Et ipsa (<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> Lundonia) multorum emporium populorum terrâ
marique venientium."&mdash;Hist. Eccl., lib. ii, cap. iii.</p></note></p>

<p>But if London's prosperity were solely due to its
geographical position, we should look for the same unrivalled
pre-eminence in commerce in towns like
Liverpool or Bristol, which possess similar local
advantages; whilst, if royal favour or court gaieties
could make cities great, we should have surely
expected Winchester, Warwick, York, or Stafford
to have outstripped London in political and commercial
greatness, for these were the residences of
the rulers of Mercia, Northumbria, and Wessex, and
the scenes of witena-gemóts long before London
could boast of similar favours. Yet none of these
equals London in extent, population, wealth, or
political importance.</p>

<note place="margin">The tenure of the City of London compared with other boroughs.</note>

<p>We must therefore look for other causes of
London's pre-eminence, and among these, we may
reckon the fact that the City has never been subject
to any over-lord except the king. It never formed a
portion of the king's demesne (<hi rend="font-style: italic">dominium</hi>), but has
ever been held by its burgesses as tenants <hi rend="font-style: italic">in capite</hi> by
burgage (free socage) tenure. Other towns like<pb n="003" /><anchor id="Pg003" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY NOT IN DEMESNE." />
Bristol, Plymouth, Beverley, or Durham, were subject
to over-lords, ecclesiastical or lay, in the person of
archbishop, bishop, abbot, baron or peer of the
realm, who kept in their own hands many of the
privileges which in the more favoured City of London
were enjoyed by the municipal authorities.</p>

<p>In the early part of the twelfth century, the town
of Leicester, for instance, was divided into four parts,
one of which was in the king's demesne, whilst the
rest were held by three distinct over-lords. In course
of time, the whole of the shares fell into the hands of
Count Robert of Meulan, who left the town in
demesne to the Earls of Leicester and his descendants;
and to this day the borough bears on its shield the
arms of the Bellomonts.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., i, 409.</p></note> The town of Birmingham is
said, in like manner, to bear the arms of the barons
of that name; the town of Cardiff, those of the De
Clares; and Manchester, those of the Byrons.
Instances might be multiplied. But the arms of
the City of London and of free boroughs, like
Winchester, Oxford, and Exeter, are referable to no
over-lord, although the borough of Southwark still
bears traces in its heraldic shield of its former
ecclesiastical connection.</p>

<note place="margin">The powers of an over-lord.</note>

<p>The influence of an over-lord for good or evil,
over those subject to his authority, was immense.
Take for instance, Sheffield, which was subject, in the
reign of Elizabeth, to the Earl of Shrewsbury. The
cutlery trade, even in those days, was the main-stay of
the town, and yet the earl could make and unmake
the rules and ordinances which governed the Cutlers'<pb n="004" /><anchor id="Pg004" />
Company, and could claim one half of the fines imposed
on its members.<note place="foot"><p>See ordinances made by the Earl (32 Eliz.).&mdash;Hunter's Hallamshire
(1819), p. 119.</p></note></p>

<p>When, during the reign of Charles II, nearly
every municipal borough in the kingdom was forced
to surrender its charter to the king, the citizens of
Durham surrendered theirs to the Bishop, who, to
the intense horror of a contemporary writer, reserved
to himself and his successors in the See the power
of approving and confirming the mayor, aldermen,
recorder, and common council of that city.<note place="foot"><p>Luttrell, Diary, i, p. 314.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">London under the Roman Empire.</note>

<p>The commercial greatness of London can be
traced back to the time of the Roman occupation of
Britain. From being little more than a stockaded fort,
situate at a point on the river's bank which admitted
of an easy passage by ferry across to Southwark, London
prospered under the protection afforded to its
traders by the presence of the Roman legions, but it
never in those days became the capital of the province.
Although a flourishing centre of commerce in the middle
of the first century of the Christian era, it was not
deemed of sufficient importance by Suetonius, the
Roman general, to run the risk of defending against
Boadicea,<note place="foot"><p>"At Suetonius mira constantia medios inter hostes Londinium
perrexit, cognomento quidem coloniæ non insigne, sed copia negotiatorum
et commeatuum maxime celebre."&mdash;Tacitus, Ann., xiv, 33.</p></note> and although thought worthy of the title of
Augusta&mdash;a name bestowed only on towns of exceptional
standing&mdash;the Romans did not hesitate to
leave both town and province to their fate as soon
as danger threatened them nearer home.</p>

<pb n="005" /><anchor id="Pg005" /><index index="toc" level1="THE ROMAN OCCUPATION." />

<note place="margin">Roman highways.</note>

<p>For military no less than for commercial purposes&mdash;and
the Roman occupation of Britain was
mainly a military one&mdash;good roads were essential, and
these the Romans excelled in making. It is remarkable
that in the Itinerary of Antoninus Pius, London
figures either as the starting point or as the terminus to
nearly one-half of the routes described in the portion
relating to Britain.<note place="foot"><p>For the direction of the various routes, see Elton's Origins of
Engl. Hist., p. 344 note.</p></note> The name of one and only one
of these Roman highways survives in the city at the
present day, and then only in its Teutonic and not
Roman form&mdash;the Watling or "Wathelinga" Street,
the street which led from Kent through the city of
London to Chester and York, and thence by two
branches to Carlisle and the neighbourhood of Newcastle.
The Ermin Street, another Roman road with
a Teutonic name, led from London to Lincoln, with
branches to Doncaster and York, but its name no
longer survives in the city.</p>

<note place="margin">London bridge and the city wall.</note>

<p>The same reasons that led the Romans to
establish good roads throughout the country led
them also to erect a bridge across the river from
London to Southwark, and in later years to enclose
the city with a wall. To the building of the bridge,
which probably took place in the early years of the
Roman occupation, London owed much of its youthful
prosperity; whenever any accident happened to
the bridge the damage was always promptly repaired.
Not so with the walls of the city. They were allowed
to fall into decay until the prudence and military
genius of the great Alfred caused them to be repaired
as a bulwark against the onslaughts of the Danes.</p>

<pb n="006" /><anchor id="Pg006" />

<note place="margin">The departure of the Roman legions, and its consequences.</note>

<p>"Britain had been occupied by the Romans, but
had not become Roman,"<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., i., 60.</p></note> and the scanty and superficial
civilization which the Britons had received
from the Roman occupation was obliterated by
the calamities which followed the northern invasions
of the fifth and following centuries. A Christian
city, as Augusta had probably been, not a vestige of
a Christian church of the Roman period has come
down to us.<note place="foot"><p>The church of St. Peter-upon-Cornhill claims a Roman origin,
but its claim is unsubstantiated by any proof.</p></note> It quickly lapsed into paganism.
Its very name disappears, and with it the names
of its streets, its traditions and its customs. Its inhabitants
forgot the Latin tongue, and the memories
of 400 years were clean wiped out. There remains to
us of the present day nothing to remind us of London
under the Roman empire, save a fragment of a wall,
a milestone, a few coins and statuettes, and some
articles of personal ornament or domestic use&mdash;little
more in fact, than what may be seen in the Museum
attached to the Guildhall Library. The long subjection
to Roman rule had one disastrous effect. It
enervated the people and left them powerless to cope
with those enemies who, as soon as the iron hand of
the Roman legions was removed, came forth from
their hiding places to harry the land.</p>

<note place="margin">Appeal to Rome for aid against the Picts and Scots. <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A. D.</hi> 446.</note>

<p>Thus it was that when the Picts and Scots again
broke loose from their northern fastnesses and threatened
London as they had done before (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 368), they
once more appealed for aid to the Roman emperor, by
whose assistance the marauders had formerly been
driven back. But times were different in 446 to<pb n="007" /><anchor id="Pg007" /><index index="toc" level1="THE SAXONS IN ENGLAND." />
what they had been in 368. The Roman empire
was itself threatened with an invasion of the Goths,
and the emperor had his hands too full to allow him
to lend a favourable ear to the "groans of the
Britons."<note place="foot"><p>This appeal took the following form:&mdash;"The groans of the
Britons to Aetius, for the third time Consul [<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 446]. The
savages drive us to the sea, and the sea casts us back upon the savages;
so arise two kinds of death, and we are either drowned or slaughtered."&mdash;Elton,
Origins of Engl. Hist., p. 360.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Meeting with refusal, the Britons call in the Saxons.</note>

<p>Compelled to seek assistance elsewhere, the
Britons invited a tribe of warriors, ever ready to let
their services for hire, from the North Sea, to lend
them their aid. The foreigners came in answer to
the invitation, they saw, they conquered; and then
they refused to leave an island the fertility of which
they appreciated no less than they despised the
slothfulness of its inhabitants.<note place="foot"><p>"Postea vero explorata insulæ fertilitate et indigenarum inertia,
rupto fœdere, in ipsos, a quibus fuerant invitati arma verterunt."&mdash;Newburgh,
Hist. Rerum Anglic. (Rolls Series No. 82). Proœmium.
p. 13.</p></note> They turned their
weapons against their employers, and utterly routed
them at Crayford, driving them to take refuge within
the walls of London.</p>

<note place="margin">The battle of the "Creegan Ford." <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 457.</note>

<p>"<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 457 (456). This year Hengist and Æsc
[Eric or Ash] his son fought against the Britons at
a place called Creegan-Ford [Crayford] and there
slew four thousand men, and the Britons then forsook
Kent, and in great terror fled to London."<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 12.</p></note>
So runs the Anglo-Saxon chronicle, and this is the
sole piece of information concerning London it vouchsafes
us for one hundred and fifty years following
the departure of the Romans. The information,<pb n="008" /><anchor id="Pg008" />
scant as it is, serves to show that London had not
quite become a deserted city, nor had yet been devastated
as others had been by the enemy. Its
walls still served to afford shelter to the terrified
refugees.</p>

<note place="margin">London, the metropolis of the East Saxons.</note>

<p>When next we read of her, she is in the possession
of the East Saxons. How they came there is a matter
for conjecture. It is possible that with the whole of
the surrounding counties in the hands of the enemy,
the Londoners were driven from their city to seek
means of subsistence elsewhere, and that when the
East Saxons took possession of it, they found houses
and streets deserted. Little relishing a life within a
town, they probably did not make a long stay, and, on
their departure, the former inhabitants returned and
the city slowly recovered its wonted appearance,
as the country around became more settled.</p>

<note place="margin">Mellitus, the first Bishop of London, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 604.</note>

<p>Christianity in the country had revived, and London
was now to receive its first bishop. It is the year
604. "This year," writes the chronicler, "Augustine
hallowed two bishops, Mellitus and Justus; Mellitus
he sent to preach baptism to the East Saxons, whose
king was called Seberht, son of Ricula, the sister of
Ethelbert whom Ethelbert had there set as king.
And Ethelbert gave to Mellitus a bishop's see at
London." This passage is remarkable for two
reasons:&mdash;(1) as shewing us that London was at this
time situate in Essex, the kingdom of the East Saxons,
and (2) that Seberht was but a <hi rend="font-style: italic">roi fainéant</hi>, enjoying
no real independence in spite of his dignity as ruler of
the East Saxons and nominal master of London, his
uncle Ethelbert, king of the Cantii, exercising a hegemony<pb n="009" /><anchor id="Pg009" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BISHOP OF LONDON." />
over "all the nations of the English as far as
the Humber." <note place="foot"><p>"In qua videlicet gente tune temporis Sabertus, nepos Ethelberti
ex sorore Ricula, regnabat quamvis sub potestate positus ejusdem
Ethelberti, qui omnibus, ut supra dictum est, usque ad terminum
Humbræ fluminis, Anglorum gentibus imperabat."&mdash;Bede, Lib. ii, c. iii.</p></note></p>

<p>Hence it is that London is spoken of by some as
being the <hi rend="font-style: italic">metropolis</hi> of the East Saxons,<note place="foot"><p>"Quorum [<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, Orientalium Saxonum] metropolis Lundonia
civitas est."&mdash;Bede, Lib. ii, c. iii. So, again, another writer describes
London at the time it was devastated by the Danes in 851 as "Sita
in aquilonari ripa Tamesis fluminis in confinio East-Sæxum et Middel-Sæxum,
sed tamen ad East-Sæxum illa civitas cum veritate pertinet."&mdash;Flor.
Wigorn., (ed. by Thorpe, for Engl. Hist. Soc.), i, 72.</p></note> and by
others as being the principal city of the Cantii;<note place="foot"><p>Kemble. Saxons in England, ii, 556.</p></note> the
fact being that, though locally situate in Essex, it was
deemed the political capital of that kingdom which
for the time being happened to be paramount.</p>

<note place="margin">St. Paul's Cathedral founded by Ethelbert.</note>

<p>After the death of Seberht, the Londoners
became dissatisfied with their bishop and drove him
out. Mellitus became in course of time Archbishop
of Canterbury, whilst the Londoners again relapsed
into paganism.<note place="foot"><p>"Mellitum vero Lundonienses episcopum recipere noluerunt,
idolatris magis pontificibus servire gaudentes. Bede, Lib. ii, cap. vi.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi>
Flor. Wigorn., i, 13.</p></note> Not only was the erection of a cathedral
in the city due to Ethelbert, but it was also at
his instigation, if not with his treasure, that Seberht,
the "wealthy sub-king of London," was, as is
believed, induced to found the Abbey of Westminster.<note place="foot"><p>"Ecclesiam ... beati Petri quæ sita est in loco terribili qui
ab incolis Thorneye nunenpatur ... quæ olim ... beati
Æthelberti hortatu ... a Sabertho prædivite quodam sub-regulo
Lundoniæ, nepote videlicet ipsius regis, constructa est."&mdash;Kemble, Cod.
Dipl., 555.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The rival Cities of London and Winchester.</note>

<p>When the Saxon kingdoms became united under
Egbert and he became <hi rend="font-style: italic">rex totius Britanniæ</hi> (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 827),<pb n="010" /><anchor id="Pg010" />
London began to take a more prominent place among
the cities of the kingdom, notwithstanding its having
been three times destroyed by fire between 674 and
801.<note place="foot"><p>Roger de Hoveden (Rolls Series No. 51), i, 8, 16, 18.</p></note> It became more often the seat of the royal
residence, and the scene of witena-gemóts; nevertheless
it was not the seat of government, much less the
capital. Then and for a long time to come it had a
formidable rival in Winchester, the chief town of
Egbert's own kingdom of Wessex. To Winchester
that king proceeded in triumph after completing the
union of the Saxon kingdoms, and thither he
summoned his vassals to hear himself proclaimed
their overlord. From Winchester, Alfred, too, promulgated
his new code of Wessex law&mdash;a part of the
famous <hi rend="font-style: italic">Domboc</hi>, a copy of which is said to have been
at one time preserved among the archives of the City
of London<note place="foot"><p>Norton, Commentaries on the City of London, 3rd ed., p. 53, &amp;c.</p></note>&mdash;and the Easter gemót, no matter where
the other gemóts of the year were held, was nearly
always held at Winchester. When it came to a
question of trade regulation, then London took
precedence of Winchester. "Let one measure and
one weight pass, such as is observed at London and
at Winchester,"<note place="foot"><p>Thorpe, 114. The Troy weight was kept in the Husting of
London and known as the Husting-weight.&mdash;Strype, Stow's Survey
(1720), Bk. v., 369.</p></note> enacted King Edgar, whose system
of legislation was marked with so much success that
"Edgar's Law" was referred to by posterity as to the
old constitution of the realm.</p>

<note place="margin">London in the hands of the Danes.</note>

<p>In the meantime, the country had been invaded
by a fresh enemy, and the same atrocities which the
Briton had suffered at the hands of the Saxon, the<pb n="011" /><anchor id="Pg011" /><index index="toc" level1="THE DANES IN LONDON." />
Saxon was made to suffer at the hands of the
Dane. London suffered with the rest of the
kingdom. In 839 we read of a "great slaughter"
there;<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 55.</p></note> in 851 the city was in the hands of the enemy,
and continued to remain at the mercy of the Danes,
so much so, in fact, that in 872 we find the Danish
army taking up winter quarters within its walls, as in
a city that was their own.<note place="foot"><p>"And in the same year [<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> 851] came three hundred and fifty
ships to the mouth of the Thames, and landed, and took Canterbury
and London by storm."&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, 56.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Treaty of Wedmore, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 878.</note>

<p>It was now, when the clouds were darkest, that
Alfred, brother of King Ethelred, appeared on the
scene, and after more than one signal success by land
and sea, concluded the treaty of Wedmore (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 878)<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 64, 65.</p></note>
by which a vast tract of land bounded by an imaginary
line drawn from the Thames along the river Lea to
Bedford, and thence along the Roman Watling Street
to the Welsh border, was ceded to the enemy under
the name of <hi rend="font-style: italic">Danelagh</hi>. The treaty, although it
curtailed the Kingdom of Wessex, and left London
itself at the mercy of the Danes, was followed by a
period of comparative tranquillity, which allowed
Alfred time to make preparations for a fresh struggle
that was to wrest from the enemy the land they had
won.</p>

<note place="margin">The Danes expelled from London.</note>

<p>The Danes, like the Angles and the Jutes before
them, set little store by fortifications and walled towns,
preferring always to defend themselves by combat in
open field, and the Roman wall of the City was
allowed to fall still further into decay. In the eyes of<pb n="012" /><anchor id="Pg012" />
Alfred on the other hand, London, with its surrounding
wall, was a place of the first importance, and one to
be acquired and kept at all hazards. At length he
achieved the object of his ambition and succeeded in
driving out the Danes, (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 883 or 884).<note place="foot"><p>The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&mdash;the existence of which in its present
form has been attributed to Alfred's encouragement of literature&mdash;seems
to convey this meaning, although it is not quite clear on the point. Henry
of Huntingdon (Rolls Series No. 44, pp. 148-149) ascribes the
recovery of London by Alfred to the year 886. The late Professor
Freeman (Norman Conquest, i., 56) does the same, and compares the
status of London at the time with that of a German free city, which
it more nearly resembled, than an integral portion of a kingdom.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Alfred "restores" London, 886-887.</note>

<p>Whilst the enemy directed their attention to
further conquests in France and Belgium, Alfred bent
his energies towards repairing the City walls and
building a citadel for his defence&mdash;"the germ of that
tower which was to be first the dwelling place of
Kings, and then the scene of the martyrdom of their
victims."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, i, 279.</p></note> To his foresight in this respect was it due
that the city of London was never again taken by
open assault, but successfully repelled all attacks whilst
the surrounding country was often devastated.</p>

<p>Nor did Alfred confine his attention solely to
strengthening the city against attacks of enemies
without or to making it more habitable. He also laid
the foundation of an internal Government analagous
to that established in the Shires. Under the year <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi>
886, the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii., 67. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> "Lundoniam civitatem honorifice
restauravit et habitabilem fecit quam etiam. Ætheredo Merciorum comitti
servandam commendavit."&mdash;Flor. Wigorn., i, 101.</p></note> records that "King
Ælfred restored London; and all the Anglo race
turned to him that were not in bondage of the
Danish men; and he then committed the burgh to<pb n="013" /><anchor id="Pg013" /><index index="toc" level1="ALFRED &quot;RESTORES&quot; LONDON." />
"the keeping of the aldorman Æthelred." In course
of time the analogy between shire and city organization
became more close. Where the former had its
Shiremote, the latter had its Folkmote, meeting in St.
Paul's Churchyard by summons of the great bell.
The County Court found its co-relative in the Husting
Court of the City; the Hundred Court in the City
Wardmote.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., i, 405.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">An attack of the Danes in the absence of Alfred gallantly repelled by the Citizens, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 894.</note>

<p>For the next ten years Alfred busied himself
founding a navy and establishing order in different
parts of the country, but in 896 he was compelled to
hasten to London from the west of England to assist
in the repulse of another attack of the Danes. Two
years before (894) the Danes had threatened London,
having established a fortification at Beamfleate or
South Benfleet, in Essex, whence they harried the
surrounding country. The Londoners on that occasion
joined that part of the army which Alfred had left
behind in an attack upon the fort, which they not only
succeeded in taking, but they "took all that there was
within, as well money as women and children, and
brought all to London; and all the ships they either
broke in pieces or burned, or brought to London or
to Rochester."<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 71.</p></note> Nor was this all: Hasting's wife
and his two sons had been made prisoners, but were
chivalrously restored by Alfred.</p>

<note place="margin">Successful strategy of Alfred against the Danes, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 896.</note>

<p>The Danes, however, were not to be daunted by
defeat nor moved from their purpose by the generous
conduct of Alfred. In 896 they again appeared.
This time they erected a work on the sea, twenty
miles above London. Alfred made a reconnaissance<pb n="014" /><anchor id="Pg014" />
and closed up the river so that they found it impossible
to bring out their ships.<note place="foot"><p>According to Henry of Huntingdon (Rolls Series No. 74. p. 150)
Alfred diverted the waters of the Lea that his enemy's ships were
stranded.</p></note> They therefore abandoned
their vessels and escaped across country, and "the men
of London" writes the chronicler, "brought away the
ships, and all those which they could not bring off
they broke up, and those that were <hi rend="font-style: italic">stalworth</hi> they
brought into London."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii. 71. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> "Quarum navium Lundonienses quasdam Lundoniam
vehunt, quasdam vero penitus confringunt."&mdash;Flor. Wigorn., i, 115.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The London "frith-gild" under Athelstan, 925-940.</note>

<p>The principle of each man becoming responsible
to the Government for the good behaviour of the
neighbour, involved in the system of frankpledge
which Alfred established throughout the whole of his
kingdom, subject to his rule, was carried a step further
by the citizens of London at a later date. Under
Athelstan (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 925-940) we find them banding
together and forming an association for mutual defence
of life and property, and thus assisting the executive
in the maintenance of law and order. A complete
code of ordinances, regulating this "frith" or peace
gild, as it was called, drawn up by the bishops and
reeves of the burgh, and confirmed by the members
on oath, is still preserved to us.<note place="foot"><p>Judicia Civitatis Lundoniæ, Thorpe, 97, 103.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">First mention of a Guildhall in London.</note>

<p>The enactments are chiefly directed against
thieves, the measures to be taken to bring them to
justice, and the penalties to be imposed on them, the
formation of a common fund for the pursuit of thieves,
and for making good to members any loss they may
have sustained. So far, the gild undertook duties of a
public character, such as are found incorporated among<pb n="015" /><anchor id="Pg015" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FRITH-GILD OF THE CITY." />
other laws of the kingdom, but it had, incidentally,
also its social and religious side. When the ruling
members met in their gild-hall,<note place="foot"><p>This is the earliest mention of a guildhall in London; and the ale-making
which took place at the meeting of the officers of the frith-guild,
accounts in all probability for Giraldus Cambrensis (Vita Galfridi,
Rolls Series No. 21 iii., c. 8.) having described the Guildhall of London
as "Aula publica quæ a potorum conventu nomen accepit."</p></note> which they did once
a month, "if they could and had leisure," they enjoyed
a refection with ale-drinking or "byt-filling."</p>

<note place="margin">The "frith-guild," something more than a mere friendly society.</note>

<p>Some writers see in the "frith-gild" of Athelstan's
day, nothing more than a mere "friendly society,"
meeting together once a month, to drink their beer
and consult about matters of mutual insurance and
other topics of more or less social and religious
character.<note place="foot"><p>"Notwithstanding the butt-filling and feasting, this appears to
have been a purely religious and social guild, and, although it may have
subsequently become a power in the city, so far, it is only of importance
as the first evidence of combination among the inhabitants of London
for anything like corporate action."&mdash;Loftie, Hist. of London, i, 68.</p></note> But there is evidence to show that the
tie which united members of a "frith-gild" was
stronger and more solemn than any which binds the
members of a friendly society or voluntary association.
The punishment of one who was guilty of breaking
his "frith" was practically banishment or death.
Such a one, in Athelstan's time, was ordered to abjure
the country, which probably meant no more than that
he was to leave his burgh or perhaps the shire in
which he dwelt, but if ever he returned, he might be
treated as a thief taken "hand-habbende" or one
taken with stolen goods upon him, in other words,
"with the mainour."<note place="foot"><p>Laws of Athelstan.&mdash;Thorpe, 93.</p></note> A thief so taken might lawfully
be killed by the first man who met him, and the
slayer was, according to the code of the "frith-gild,"<pb n="016" /><anchor id="Pg016" />
"to be twelve pence the better for the deed."<note place="foot"><p>Judicia Civitatis Lundoniæ.&mdash;Thorpe, 100.</p></note>
Under these circumstances, it is more reasonable to
suppose, that the "frith-gild" was not so much a
voluntary association as one imposed upon members
of the community by some public authority.<note place="foot"><p>Gross, The Gild Merchant, i, 178-179.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Encouragement given to London merchants.</note>

<p>The commercial supremacy of London, not only
over Winchester but over every other town in the
kingdom, now becomes more distinct, for when Athelstan
appointed moneyers or minters throughout the
country, he assigned eight (the largest number of
all) to London, whilst for Winchester he appointed
only six, other towns being provided with but one or
at most two.<note place="foot"><p>Wilkins, Leges Anglo-Sax., p. 59.</p></note> The king, moreover, showed his
predilection for London by erecting a mansion house
for himself within the city's walls.</p>

<p>The encouragement which Athelstan gave to
commercial enterprise by enacting, that any merchant
who undertook successfully three voyages across the
high seas at his own cost (if not in his own vessel)
should rank as a thane,<note place="foot"><p>"And if a merchant thrived so that he fared thrice over the wide
sea by his own means [cɲæƥte, craft] then was he thenceforth of thane-right
worthy." (Thorpe, 81.) The word cɲæƥte is similarly translated
in Wilkins's Leges Anglo-Saxonicæ; (ed. 1721, p. 71.) <hi rend="font-style: italic">per facultates suas</hi>;
but there seems no reason why it should not be taken to mean literally
a craft or vessel. The passage occurs in a list of "People's Rank"
which "formerly" prevailed, and is probably of Athelstan's time, even
if it did not form part of the Judicia Civitatis Lundoniæ.&mdash;Wilkins,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">op. cit.</hi> p. 70 note.</p></note> must have affected the London
burgess more than those of any other town.</p>

<note place="margin">Return of the Danes <hi rend="font-style: italic">temp.</hi> Ethelred the Unready,
991-994.</note>

<p>Under Ethelred II, surnamed the "Unready"
or "redeless" from his indifference to the "rede" or
council of his advisers, the city would again have<pb n="017" /><anchor id="Pg017" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FIRST PAYMENT OF DANEGELT." />
fallen into the hands of the Danes, but for the personal
courage displayed by its inhabitants and the
protection which, by Alfred's foresight, the walls were
able to afford them. In 994, Olaf and Sweyn sailed
up the Thames with a large fleet and threatened to
burn London. Obstinate fighting took place, but the
enemy, we are told, "sustained more harm and evil
than they ever deemed that any townsman could do
to them, for the Holy Mother of God, on that day,
manifested her mercy to the townsmen and delivered
them from their foes."<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 105.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The first payment of Danegelt, 991.</note>

<p>Matters might not have been so bad had not the
king already committed the fatal error of attempting
to secure peace by buying off the enemy. In 991, he
had, with the consent of his witan, raised the sum of
£10,000 with which he had bribed the Danish host.
This was the origin of the tax known as Danegelt,
which in after years became one of the chief financial
resources of the Crown and continued almost uninterruptedly
down to the reign of Henry II. The effect
of the bribe was naturally enough to induce the
enemy to make further depredations whenever in
want of money; and accordingly, a Danish fleet
threatened London the very next year (992) and
again in 994. On this last occasion, the same wretched
expedient was resorted to, and the Danes were again
bought off.</p>

<note place="margin">The massacre of Danes 13th Nov., 1002.</note>

<p>Nor was cowardice the only charge of which
Ethelred was guilty. To this must be added treachery
and murder. In the year 1002, when he married the
daughter of the Duke of Normandy, hoping thereby<pb n="018" /><anchor id="Pg018" />
to win the Duke's friendship and to close the harbours
on the French coast against Sweyn, Ethelred issued
secret orders for a massacre of all Danes found in
England. In this massacre, which took place on the
Festival of St. Brice (13th Nov.), perished Gunhild,
sister of Sweyn. Under these circumstances, it can
scarcely be wondered at, that thenceforth the Danish
invasions became more frequent, more systematic, and
more extensive than ever.</p>

<p>For four years they continued their depredations
"cruelly marking every shire in Wessex with burning
and with harrying." Then they were again bought
off with a sum of £36,000, and two years' respite
(1007-8) was gained.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, p. 114.</p></note> It was a respite and no more.
As soon as they had spent their money, they came
again, and in 1009 made several assaults on
London&mdash;"They often fought against the town of
London, but to God be praise that it yet stands
sound, and they have ever fared ill."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, p. 115.</p></note> Every year
they struck deeper into the heart of the country, and
carried their plundering expeditions from Wessex into
Mercia and East Anglia.</p>

<note place="margin">The murder of Abp. Alphage, 1012.</note>

<p>In 1011 Canterbury was taken and sacked,
Alphage, the Archbishop, being made prisoner, and
carried away by the Danish fleet to Greenwich.
Finding it impossible to extort a ransom, they brutally
murdered him (19th May, 1012), in one of their
drunken moods, pelting him in their open court or
"husting" with bones and skulls of oxen.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii. pp. 117, 118. Annal. Monast., Waverley (Rolls Series
No. 36), ii, p. 173.</p></note> The worthy
prelate's corpse was allowed to be removed to London<pb n="019" /><anchor id="Pg019" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON SUBMITS TO SWEYN." />
where it was reverently interred in St. Paul's. A few
years later, Cnut caused it to be transferred with due
solemnity to the Archbishop's own metropolitan
church of Canterbury.</p>

<note place="margin">Sweyn again attacks London, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1013.</note>

<p>In the following year, Sweyn was so successful
in reducing the Northumbrians and the inhabitants of
the five boroughs,<note place="foot"><p>The towns of Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Stamford, and
Derby, which for many years were occupied by the Danes, were so
called.</p></note> as well as the towns of Winchester
and Oxford, taking hostages from each as he went,
that he thought he might venture once more to attack
London itself; hoping for better success than had
attended him on previous occasions. He was the
more anxious to capture London, because Ethelred
himself was there, but he again met with such
determined resistance, and so many of his followers
were drowned in the Thames that for the fourth time
he had to beat a retreat.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, pp. 118, 119.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">London submits.</note>

<p>Leaving London for a while, Sweyn proceeded to
conquer that part of England which still held out
against him, and having accomplished his purpose,
was again preparing to attack the one city which had
baffled all his attempts to capture, when the Londoners
themselves, finding further opposition hopeless, offered
their submission and left Ethelred to take care of
himself.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, p. 119. Henry
of Huntingdon (Rolls Series No 74), p. 180.</p></note> This he did by betaking himself to
Normandy, where he remained until Sweyn's death
in the following year (3rd Feb., 1014).</p>

<note place="margin">Election of Cnut, 1014.</note>

<p>Upon this event taking place, the crews of the
Danish fleet assumed the right of disposing of the<pb n="020" /><anchor id="Pg020" />
English crown, and elected Sweyn's son, Cnut, to be
king. The English, however, compelled as they had
been by superior strength to submit to the father,
were in no mood to accept without a struggle the
sovereignty of his son. The whole of the Witan at
once declared in favour of sending for Ethelred, with
the assurance "that no lord was dearer than their
natural lord," if only he would promise to govern
them more justly than before.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, p. 120.</p></note> Ethelred sent word
by Edmund his son that "he would be to them a
kind lord, and amend all the things which they
eschewed, and all the things should be forgiven
which had been done or said to him, on condition
that they all, unanimously and without treachery,
would turn to him." Pledges were given and taken
on either side, and thenceforth a Danish king was to
be looked upon as an outlaw.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, p. 120. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> "Ad hæc
principes se non amplius Danicum regem admissuros in Angliam
unanimiter spoponderunt."&mdash;Flor. Wigorn., i, p. 169.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Ethelred returns to London.</note>

<p>When Ethelred arrived in England, he was accompanied
according to an Icelandic Saga,<note place="foot"><p>The Heimskringla or Chronicle of the kings of Norway, translated
from the Icelandic of Snorro Sturleson, ii. pp. 8-11.</p></note> by King Olaf,
of Norway, who assisted him in expelling the Danes
from Southwark, and gaining an entrance into the
city. The manner in which this was carried out, is
thus described. A small knot of Danes occupied a
stronghold in the City, whilst others were in possession
of Southwark. Between the two lay London Bridge&mdash;a
wooden bridge, "so broad that two waggons
could pass each other upon it"&mdash;fortified by barricades,
towers, and parapets, and manned by Danes.
Ethelred was naturally very anxious to get possession<pb n="021" /><anchor id="Pg021" /><index index="toc" level1="CNUT EXPELLED BY ETHELRED." />
of the bridge, and a meeting of chiefs was summoned
to consult how it could be done. Olaf promised to
lay his fleet alongside the bridge if the English would
do the same. This was agreed upon. Having
covered in the decks of the vessels with a wooden
roof to protect the crew and fighting men, Olaf succeeded
in rowing light up to the bridge and laying
cables round its piers. This done, he caused his ships
to head down stream and the crews to row their
hardest. The result was that the piles were loosened
and the bridge, heavily weighted by the Danes who
were fighting upon it, gave way. Many were thrown
into the river, whilst others made good their retreat
to Southwark, which was soon afterwards stormed
and taken. This incident in connection with
Ethelred's return formed the subject of more than
one Scandinavian poem, of which the following
may serve as a specimen:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">"London Bridge is broken down&mdash;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Gold is won and bright renown.</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">    Shields resounding,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">    War-horns sounding,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Hildur shouting in the din!</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">    Arrows singing,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">    Mail-coats ringing&mdash;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Odin makes our Olaf win!"</l>
</lg>

<note place="margin">Drives Cnut out of England.</note>

<p>For a short while after his return Ethelred displayed
a spirit of patriotism and courage beyond any
he had hitherto shown. He succeeded in surprising
and defeating the Danes in that district of Lincolnshire
known as Lindsey, and drove Cnut to take
refuge in his ships, and eventually to sail away to
Denmark.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 120.</p></note></p>

<pb n="022" /><anchor id="Pg022" />

<note place="margin">Return of Cnut, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1015.</note>

<p>It was not long before he again appeared; he was
then, however, to meet in the field Ethelred's son,
Edmund, whose valour had gained for him the name of
Ironside. This spirited youth, forming a striking contrast
to the weak and pusillanimous character of his
father, had collected a force to withstand the enemy,
but the men refused to fight unless Ethelred came
with them, and unless they had "the support of the
citizens of London."<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 121.</p></note> A message was therefore
sent to him at London to take the field with such a
force as he could gather. Father and son thereupon
joined forces; but the king was in ill-health, and it
wanted but a whisper of treachery to send him back
to the security of London's walls. Thither, too,
marched Cnut, but before he arrived Ethelred had
died (23rd April, 1016).<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii., 122.</p></note> The late king was buried
in St. Paul's.<note place="foot"><p>Malmesbury, Gesta Regum (Rolls Series, No. 90), i, 215.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The laws of Ethelred regulating foreign trade.</note>

<p>The city of London had by this time attained a
position higher than it had ever reached before.
"We cannot as yet call it the capital of the kingdom,
but its geographical position made one of the chief
bulwarks of the land, and in no part of the realm do
we find the inhabitants outdoing the patriotism and
courage of its valiant citizens."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, i, 308.</p></note> Under Edgar
the foreign trade with the city had increased to such
an extent that Ethelred, his son, deemed it time to
draw up a code of laws to regulate the customs to be
paid by the merchants of France and Flanders as well
as by the "emperor's men," the fore-runners of those
"easterling" merchants, who, from their headquarters<pb n="023" /><anchor id="Pg023" /><index index="toc" level1="THE LAWS OF ETHELRED." />
in the Steel-yard at Dowgate, subsequently became
known as merchants of the Steel-yard.<note place="foot"><p>Thorpe, Ancient Laws and Institutes, 127, 128.</p></note></p>

<p>Among the multitude of foreigners that in after-years
thronged the streets of the city bartering
pepper and spices from the far east, gloves and
cloth, vinegar and wine, in exchange for the rural
products of the country, might be seen the now
much hated but afterwards much favoured Dane.<note place="foot"><p>In course of time the natives of Denmark acquired the privilege
of sojourning all the year round in London&mdash;a privilege accorded to
few, if any other, foreigners. They enjoyed moreover the benefits of
the 'the law of the city of London' (<hi rend="font-style: italic">la lei de la citie de Loundres</hi>) in
other words, the right of resorting to fair or market in any place
throughout England.&mdash;Liber Cust. pt. i, p. 63.</p></note>
The Dane was again master of all England, except
London, and Ethelred's kingdom, before the close of
his reign, was confined within the narrow limits of the
city's walls; "that true-hearted city was once more
the bulwark of England, the centre of every patriotic
hope, the special object of every hostile attack."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, i, 418.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Election of Edmund Ironside by the Londoners, 1016.</note>

<p>At Ethelred's death the Witan who were in
London united with the inhabitants of the city in
choosing Edmund as his successor. This is the first
recorded instance of the Londoners having taken a
direct part in the election of a king. Cnut disputed
Edmund's right to the crown, and proceeded to attack
the city. He sailed up the Thames with his fleet,
but being unable to pass the bridge, he dug a canal
on the south side of the river, whereby he was
enabled to carry his ships above bridge, and so invest
the city along the whole length of the riverside. To
complete the investment, and so prevent any of the
inhabitants escaping either by land or water, he<pb n="024" /><anchor id="Pg024" />
ditched the city round, so that none could pass in
or out.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 122.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Cnut's attempts on London frustrated.</note>

<p>This, as well as two other attempts made by Cnut
within a few weeks of each other to capture London
by siege, were frustrated by the determined
opposition of the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>"At oppidanis magnanimiter
pugnantibus repulsa."&mdash;Malmesbury, i, 216.</p></note> "Almighty God saved
it," as the chronicler piously remarks.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 123.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Victory of the Danes at Assandun, 1016.</note>

<p>Nor was Cnut more successful in the field, being
worsted in no less than five pitched battles against
Edmund, until by the treachery of Edmund's brother-in-law,
Eadric, alderman of Mercia, he succeeded at
last in vanquishing the English army on the memorable
field of Assandun.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, 121, 123. Henry of Huntingdon
relates that Eadric caused a panic on the field of battle by crying out
that Edmund had been killed. "Flet Engle, flet Engle, ded is
Edmund."</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Agreement between Edmund and Cnut for partition of the kingdom.</note>

<p>After this Edmund reluctantly consented to a
conference and a division of the kingdom. The
meeting took place at Olney, and there it was agreed
that Edmund should retain his crown, and rule over
all England south of the Thames, together with East
Anglia, Essex and London, whilst Cnut should enjoy
the rest of the kingdom. "The citizens, beneath
whose walls the power of Cnut and his father had
been so often shattered, now made peace with the
Danish host. As usual, money was paid to them,
and they were allowed to winter as friends within
the unconquered city."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, i, 437.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Cnut king of all England, 1016-1035.</note>

<p>The partition of the kingdom between Edmund
and Cnut had scarcely been agreed upon before the
former unexpectedly died (30th Nov., 1016) and Cnut<pb n="025" /><anchor id="Pg025" /><index index="toc" level1="THE &quot;LITHSMEN&quot; OF LONDON." />
became master of London and king of all England.
His rule was mild, beneficent and just, recognising no
distinction between Dane and Englishman, and
throughout his long reign of nearly twenty years
the citizens of London enjoyed that perfect peace so
necessary for the successful exercise of their commercial
pursuits.</p>

<note place="margin">Election of Cnut's Successors. 1183.</note>

<p>At the election of Cnut's successor which took
place at Oxford in 1035, the Londoners again played
an important part. This time, however, it was
not the "burhwaru or burgesses" of the City who
attended the gemót which had been summoned for
the purpose of election, but "lithsmen" of London.</p>

<note place="margin">The lithsmen of London attend gemót at Oxford.</note>

<p>As to who these "lithsmen" were, and how they
came to represent the City (if indeed they represented
the City at all) on this important occasion much
controversy has arisen. To some they appear as
nothing more than the "nautic multitude" or "sea-faring
men" of London.<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, i, 538.</p></note> On the other hand, there
are those who hold that they were merchants who
had achieved thane right under the provisions of
Athelstan's day already mentioned;<note place="foot"><p>"The 'lithsmen' (ship-owners) of London, who with others
raised Harold to the throne, were doubtless such 'burg-thegns.'"&mdash;Gross,
The Gild Merchant, i, 186. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Lingard, i, 318. Norton
Commentaries, pp. 23-24.</p></note> whilst there are
still others who are inclined to look upon them as so
many commercial travellers who had made their way
to Oxford by river in the ordinary course of business,
and who happened by good fortune to have been in that
city at the time of a great political crisis.<note place="foot"><p>Green, Conquest of England, p. 462. Loftie, Hist. of London,
i, 73. "The Londoners who attended must have gone by
way of the river in their 'liths.'"&mdash;Historic Towns, London
(Loftie), p. 197.</p></note> The truth<pb n="026" /><anchor id="Pg026" />
probably lies somewhere between these extremes.
The "lithsmen" may not themselves have been
thanes, although they are recorded as having been at
Oxford with almost all the thanes north of the
Thames;<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 129.</p></note> but that they were something more than
mere watermen, such as we shall see joining with the
apprentices of London at important political crises,
and that they were acting more or less as representatives
of the Londoners who had already acquired a
predominant voice in such matters, seems beyond doubt.</p>

<note place="margin">Londoners desire for peace above all things.</note>

<p>During the next thirty years London took no
prominent part in the affairs of the country, content if
only allowed to have leisure to mind its own business.
The desire for peace is the key-note to the action
of the citizens of London at every important crisis.
Without peace, commerce became paralyzed. Peace
could be best secured by a strong government, and
such a government, whether in the person of a king
or protector could count upon their support. "For
it they were ready to devote their money and their
lives, for commerce, the child of opportunity, brought
wealth; wealth power; and power led independence
in its train." The quarrels of the half-brothers,
Harold and Harthacnut, the attempt by one or both
of the sons of Ethelred and Emma to recover their
father's kingdom, and the question of the innocence or
guilt of Earl Godwine in connection with the murder
of one of them, affected the citizens of London only so
far as such disturbances were likely to impede the
traffic of the Thames or to make it dangerous for them
to convey their merchandise along the highways of
the country.</p>

<pb n="027" /><anchor id="Pg027" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON THE CAPITAL." />

<note place="margin">Revival of Danegelt, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi>, 1040.</note>

<p>The payment of Danegelt at the accession of
Harthacnut (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1040),<note place="foot"><p>At the death of Harold, Harthacnut was invited to accept the
crown by an embassy from England, of which the Bishop of London
was a member. He accepted the offer and crossed over from the
continent with a fleet of sixty ships, manned by Danish soldiers, and his
first act was to demand eight marks for each rower; an imposition that
was borne with difficulty.  Anglo-Sax. Chron. ii, 132.</p></note> probably touched the feelings,
as it certainly did the pockets, of the Londoners,
more than any other event which happened during
this period.</p>

<note place="margin">London the recognised capital, <hi rend="font-style: italic">temp.</hi> Edward, Confessor.</note>

<p>Upon the sudden death of Harthacnut (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi>
1042), who died in a fit "as he stood at his drink,"<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax Chron., ii, 132.</p></note>
the choice of the whole nation fell on Edward, his
half-brother&mdash;"before the king buried were, all folk
chose Edward to king at London."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, 2nd ed., ii. 5. But according to
Kemble (Saxons in England, ii, 259 note), Edward's election took
place at a hastily convened meeting at Gillingham.</p></note> The share that
the Londoners took in this particular election is not
so clear as in other cases. Nevertheless, the importance
of the citizens was daily growing, and by the time of
the accession of Edward the Confessor, the City was
recognised as the capital of the kingdom, the chief
seat for the administration of the law, and the place
where the king usually resided.<note place="foot"><p>"London, que caput est regni et legum. semper curia domini regis."&mdash;Laws
of Edward Confessor, Thorpe, p. 197 note.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Gemóts held in London.</note>

<p>In early Saxon times the witan had met in any
town where the king happened at the time to be;
and although theoretically every freeman had a right
to attend its meetings, practically the citizens of the
town wherein the gemót happened at the time to be
held, enjoyed an advantage over freemen coming from
a distance. Alfred ordained that the witan should<pb n="028" /><anchor id="Pg028" />
meet in London for purposes of legislation twice a
year.<note place="foot"><p>For a list of gemóts held in London from <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 790, see Kemble's
Saxons in England, ii, 241-261.</p></note> Athelstan, Edmund and Edgar had held
gemóts in London, the last mentioned king holding a
great gemót (<hi rend="font-style: italic">mycel gemót</hi>) in St. Paul's Church in 973.</p>

<note place="margin">London declares for Godwine, 1052.</note>

<p>During the reign of Edward the Confessor, at
least six meetings of the witan took place in London;
the more important of these being held in 1051 and
the following year. By the gemót of 1051, which
partook of the nature of a court-martial, Earl Godwine
was condemned to banishment; but before a twelve-month
had elapsed, he was welcomed back at a great
assembly or <hi rend="font-style: italic">mycel gemót</hi> held in the open air without
the walls of London.<note place="foot"><p>Malmesbury, i, 242-244. Freeman, ii, 148-332.</p></note> The nation had become
disatisfied owing to the king's increasing favour to
Norman strangers, but the earl desired to learn how
stood the City of London towards him, and for this
purpose made a stay at Southwark. He was soon
satisfied on this point. "The townsfolk of the great
city were not a whit behind their brethren of Kent
and Sussex in their zeal for the national cause. The
spirit which had beaten back Swend and Cnut, the
spirit which was in after times to make London ever
the stronghold of English freedom, the spirit which
made its citizens foremost in the patriot armies alike
of the thirteenth and of the seventeenth centuries,
was now as warm in the hearts of those gallant
burghers as in any earlier or later age. With a
voice all but unanimous, the citizens declared in
favour of the deliverer; a few votes only, the votes,
it may be, of strangers or of courtiers, were given<pb n="029" /><anchor id="Pg029" /><index index="toc" level1="EARL GODWINE AND THE CITIZENS." />
against the emphatic resolution, that what the earl
would the city would."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, ii, 324.</p></note> Having secured the favour
of London his cause was secure. That the citizens
heartily welcomed the earl, going forth in a body to
meet him on his arrival, we learn also from another
source;<note place="foot"><p>Sed omnis civitas duci obviam et auxilio processit et præsidio
acclamantque illi omnes una voce prospere in adventu suo. "Life of
Edward Conf." (Rolls Series No. 3.), p. 406.</p></note> although, one at least of the ancient chroniclers
strongly hints that the favour of the citizens had
been obtained by bribes and promises.<note place="foot"><p>"Interim quosdam per internuntios, quosdam per se cives Lundonienses,
quos variis pollicitationibus prius illexerat, convenit, et ut omnes
fere quæ volebat omnino vellent, effecit."&mdash;Flor. Wigorn., i., 209.</p></note> The earl's
return was marked by decrees of outlawry against the
king's foreign favourites, whose malign influence he
had endeavoured formerly to counteract, and who had
proved themselves strong enough to procure the
banishment of himself and family.</p>

<note place="margin">The dedication of Westminster Abbey, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1065.</note>

<p>The last gemót held under Edward was one
specially summoned to meet at Westminster at the
close of the year 1065, for the purpose of witnessing
the dedication of the new abbey church which the
king loved so well and to which his remains were so
shortly afterwards to be carried.</p>

<note place="margin">Death of Edward the Confessor.</note>

<p>He died at the opening of the year, and the same
witan who had attended his obsequies elected Harold,
the late Earl Godwine's son, as his successor. This
election, however, was doomed to be overthrown by
the powerful sword of William the Norman.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="030" /><anchor id="Pg030" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER II.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">The landing of William, and Battle of Senlac, 1066.</note>

<p>As soon as the news of Harold's coronation
reached William of Normandy, he claimed the crown
which Edward the Confessor had promised him. According
to every principle of succession recognised in
England, at the time, he had no right to the crown
whatever. When the Norman invader landed at
Pevensey, Harold was at York, having recently succeeded
in defeating his brother Tostig, the deposed
Earl of Northumbria, who, with the assistance of
Harold Hardrada, had attacked the northern earls,
Edwine and Morkere. On hearing of the Duke's
landing, Harold hastened to London. A general
muster of forces was there ordered, and Edwine and
Morkere, who were bound to Harold by family tie&mdash;the
King having married their sister&mdash;were bidden
to march southward with the whole force of their
earldoms. But neither gratitude for their late deliverance
at the hands of their brother-in-law, nor family
affection, could hurry the steps of these earls, and
they arrived too late. The battle of Senlac, better
known as the battle of Hastings, had been won and
lost (14th Oct., 1066), the Norman was conqueror, and
Harold had perished. For a second time within
twelve months the English throne was vacant.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 165-167.</p></note></p>

<p>The times were too critical to hold a formal gemót
for the election of a successor to the throne; but the<pb n="031" /><anchor id="Pg031" /><index index="toc" level1="THE NORMAN CONQUEROR." />
citizens of London and the sailors or "butsecarls"
(whom it is difficult not to associate with the "lithsmen"
of former days) showed a marked predilection in favour
of Edgar the Atheling, grandson of Edmund Ironside,
and the sole survivor of the old royal line. The
Archbishop, too, as well as the northern earls, were in
his favour, but the latter soon withdrew to their
respective earldoms and left London and the Atheling
to their fate.<note place="foot"><p>"Aldredus autem Eboracensis archiepiscopus et iidem Comites
cum civibus Lundoniensibus et butsecarlis, clitonem Eadgarum, Eadmundi
Ferrei Lateris nepotem, in regem levare volueren, et cum eo se
pugnam inituros promisere; sed dum ad pugnam descendere multi se
paravere, comites suum auxilium ab eis retraxere, et cum suo exercitu
domum redierunt."&mdash;Flor. Wigorn., i, 228.</p></note> Thus, "the patriotic zeal of the men
of London was thwarted by the base secession of the
northern traitors."</p>

<note place="margin">William's March to London.</note>

<p>After waiting awhile at Hastings for the country
to make voluntary submission, and finding that homagers
did not come in, William proceeded to make a
further display of force. In this he betrayed no haste,
but made his way through Kent in leisurely fashion,
receiving on his way the submission of Winchester
and Canterbury, using no more force than was
absolutely necessary, and endeavouring to allay all
fears, until at length he reached the suburbs of
London.<note place="foot"><p>Such is the description of William's march, as given by Malmesbury
(ii, 307). Another chronicler describes his march as one of
slaughter and devastation.&mdash;Flor. Wigorn., i, 228.</p></note></p>

<p>He had been astute enough to give out that he
came not to claim a crown, but only a right to be put
in nomination for it. To the mind of the Londoner,
such quibbling failed to commend itself, and the
citizens lost no time in putting their city into a posture<pb n="032" /><anchor id="Pg032" />
of defence, determined not to surrender it without a
blow.</p>

<note place="margin">Sets fire to Southwark in hopes of terrifying the citizens.</note>

<p>Upon William's arrival in Southwark, the citizens
sallied forth. They were, however, beaten back after
a sharp skirmish, and compelled to seek shelter again
within their city's walls. William hesitated to make
a direct attack upon the city, but hoped by setting
fire to Southwark to strike terror into the inhabitants
and bring them to a voluntary surrender. He failed
in his object; the city still held out, and William next
resorted to diplomacy.</p>

<note place="margin">Negotiations between William and the City.</note>

<p>The ruling spirit within the city at that time
was Ansgar or Esegar the "Staller" under whom,
as Sheriff of Middlesex, the citizens had marched
out to fight around the royal standard at Hastings.
He had been carried wounded from the field, and
was now borne hither and thither on a litter, encouraging
the citizens to make a stout defence of
their city. To him, it is said, William sent a private
message from Berkhampstead, asking only that the
Conqueror's right to the crown of England might be
acknowledged and nothing more, the real power of
the kingdom might remain with Ansgar if he so
willed. Determined not to be outwitted by the
Norman, Ansgar (so the story goes) summoned a
meeting of the eldermen (<hi rend="font-style: italic">natu majores</hi>) of the City&mdash;the
forerunners of the later aldermen&mdash;and proposed
a feigned submission which might stave off immediate
danger. The proposal was accepted and a
messenger despatched. William pretended to accept
the terms offered, and at the same time so worked
upon the messenger with fair promises and gifts that
on his return he converted his fellow citizens and<pb n="033" /><anchor id="Pg033" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON SUBMITS TO WILLIAM." />
induced them by representations of the Conqueror's
friendly intentions and of the hopelessness of resistance,
to make their submission to him, and to throw
over the young Atheling.</p>

<note place="margin">London submits to the Conqueror.</note>

<p>Whatever poetic tinge there may be about the
story as told by Guy of Amiens, it is certain that the
citizens came to the same resolution, in effect, as that
described by the poet, nor could they well have done
otherwise. The whole of the country for miles
around London, had already tendered submission or
been forced into it. The city had become completely
isolated, and sooner or later its inhabitants must have
been starved out. There was, moreover, a strong
foreign element within its walls.<note place="foot"><p>The bishop was certainly Norman, and so probably was the port-reeve.</p></note> Norman followers
of Edward the Confessor were ever at hand to counsel
submission. London submitted, the citizens accepting
the rule of the Norman Conqueror as they had
formerly accepted that of Cnut the Dane, "from
necessity." An embassy was despatched to Berkhampstead,
comprising the Archbishop of York, the
young Atheling, the earls Edwine and Morkere, and
"all the best men of London," to render homage and
give hostages,<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron. ii, 168-169.</p></note> and thus it was, that within three
months of his landing, William was acknowledged as
the lawfully elected King of England, and, as such, he
crowned himself at Westminster, promising to govern
the nation as well as any king before him if they
would be faithful to him.</p>

<note place="margin">His charter to the citizens of London.</note>

<p>The conciliatory spirit of William towards the
Londoners is seen in the favourable terms he was
ready to concede them. Soon after his coronation&mdash;<pb n="034" /><anchor id="Pg034" />
the precise date cannot be determined&mdash;he granted
them a charter,<note place="foot"><p>This charter is preserved in the Town Clerk's Office at the Guildhall.
A fac-simile of it and of another charter of William, granting lands
to Deorman, forms a frontispiece to this volume. The late Professor
Freeman (Norman Conquest, second edition, revised 1876, iv, 29) wrote
of this venerable parchment as bearing William's mark&mdash;"the cross traced
by the Conqueror's own hand"&mdash;but this appears to be a mistake. The
same authority, writing of the transcript of the charter made by the late
Mr. Riley and printed by him in his edition of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber Custumarum</hi>
(Rolls Series, pt. ii, p. 504), remarks that, "one or two words here look
a little suspicious"; and justly so, for the transcript is far from being
literally accurate.</p></note> by which he clearly declared his
purpose not to reduce the citizens to a state of
dependent vassalage, but to establish them in all the
rights and privileges they had hitherto enjoyed.</p>

<p>The charter, rendered into modern English, runs
as follows:&mdash;</p>

<p>"William, King, greets William, Bishop, and Gosfregdh,
Portreeve, and all the burgesses within London,
French and English, friendly. And I give you to
know that I will that ye be all those laws worthy
that ye were in King Eadward's day.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> "<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ego volo quod vos sitis omni lege illa digni qua fuistis
Edwardi diebus Regis.</hi>" These words appear in the xivth century Latin
version of William's Charter, preserved at the Guildhall.</p></note> And I will
that every child be his father's heir after his father's
day and I will not suffer that any man offer you any
wrong. God keep you."</p>

<p>The terms of the charter are worthy of study.
They are primarily remarkable as indicating that the
City of London was, at the time, subject to a government
which combined the secular authority of the
port-reeve with the ecclesiastical authority of the
bishop. It was said, indeed, to have been greatly
due to the latter's intercession that the charter was<pb n="035" /><anchor id="Pg035" /><index index="toc" level1="WILLIAM'S CHARTER TO THE CITY." />
granted at all, and, in this belief, the mayor and
aldermen were long accustomed to pay a solemn
visit to the bishop's tomb in St. Paul's church, there
to hear a <hi rend="font-style: italic">De profundis</hi> on the day when the new
mayor took his oath of office before the Barons of the
Exchequer.<note place="foot"><p>Liber Albus (Rolls Series i, 26).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The office of port-reeve.</note>

<p>As regards the port-reeve&mdash;the <hi rend="font-style: italic">port-gerefa</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>,
reeve of the port or town of London<note place="foot"><p>Opinions differ as to the derivation of the term port. Some, like
Kemble, refer it to the Lat. <hi rend="font-style: italic">portus</hi>, in the sense of an enclosed place
for sale or purchase, a market. ("Portus est conclusus locus, quo
importantur merces et inde exportantur. Est et statio conclusa
et munita."&mdash;Thorpe, i, 158). Others, like Dr. Stubbs (Const.
Hist., i, 404 n.), connect it with Lat. <hi rend="font-style: italic">porta</hi>, not in its restricted
signification of a gate, but as implying a market place, markets being
often held at a city's gates. The Latin terms <hi rend="font-style: italic">porta</hi> and <hi rend="font-style: italic">portus</hi> were in
fact so closely allied, that they both alike signified a market place or a
gate. Thus, in the will of Edmund Harengeye, enrolled in the Court
of Husting, London, we find the following: "Ac eciam lego et volo
quod illa tenementa cum magno portu vocato le Brodegate ...
vendantur per executores meos."&mdash;Hust. Roll, 114 (76).</p></note>&mdash;the nature and
extent of his duties and authority, much uncertainty
exists. Whilst, in many respects, his position in a
borough was analogous no doubt to the shire-reeve or
sheriff of a county, there were, on the other hand,
duties belonging to and exercised by the one which
were not exercised by the other. Thus, for instance,
the port-reeve, unlike the sheriff, exercised no judicial
functions in a criminal court, nor presided over court-leets
in the city as the sheriff did in his county by
<hi rend="font-style: italic">turn</hi>, the latter being held independently by the
alderman of each ward.<note place="foot"><p>Norton, Commentaries on the City of London, 3rd ed., pp. 258-259.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The foreign element already existing in the City.</note>

<note place="margin">Its increase after the Conquest.</note>

<note place="margin">The charter makes no new grant.</note>

<p>In the next place the charter brings prominently
to our notice the fact that there was already existing
within the City's walls a strong Norman element,
existing side by side with the older English burgesses,<pb n="036" /><anchor id="Pg036" />
which the Conqueror did well not to ignore. The
descendants of the foreign merchants from France
and Normandy, for whose protection Ethelred had
legislated more than half a century before, had continued
to carry on their commercial intercourse with
the Londoners, and were looking forward to a freer
interchange of merchandise now that the two countries
were under one sovereign. Their expectation
was justified. No sooner had London submitted to
the Norman Conqueror than, we are told, "many of
the citizens of Rouen and Caen passed over thither,
preferring to be dwellers in that city, inasmuch as it
was fitter for their trading, and better stored with
the merchandise in which they were wont to
traffic."<note place="foot"><p>"London and her election of Stephen," a paper read before the
Archæol. Inst. in 1866, by the late Mr. Green (p. 267).</p></note> But by far the most important clause in
the charter is that which places the citizens of London
in the same position respecting the law of the land as
they enjoyed in the days of their late king, Edward
the Confessor. Here there is distinct evidence that
the Conqueror had come "neither to destroy, nor to
found, but to continue."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, v, p. 55.</p></note> The charter granted
nothing new; it only ratified and set the royal
seal<note place="foot"><p>There appears to be no doubt that the charter preserved at the
Guildhall had a seal, but not a fragment remains.</p></note> to the rights and privileges of the citizens
already in existence.</p>

<note place="margin">William's other charter granting the sheriffwick of London.</note>

<p>It is recorded that William granted another
charter to the citizens of London, vesting in them the
City and Sheriffwick of London, and this charter the
citizens proffered as evidence of their rights over the
cloister and church of St. Martin le Grand, when those<pb n="037" /><anchor id="Pg037" /><index index="toc" level1="THE &quot;DOOMSDAY&quot; BOOK." />
rights were challenged in the reign of Henry VI.<note place="foot"><p>"Et dicunt quod prefatus dominus conquestor ante fundacionem
ecclesie predicte et confeccionem carte sue de qua superius fit mencio
auctoritate parliament sui et per duas cartes suas quas dicti maior et
Cives hic proferunt scilicet per unam earam dimissit tunc civibus London'
totam dictam civitatem et vice-comitatum London' cum omnibus appendiciis
rebus et consuetudinibus eis qualitercumque pertinentibus....
Et per alteram concessit et auctoritate supradicta confirmavit
eisdem civibus et successoribus suis quod haberent predicta ac omnes
alias libertates et liberas consuetudines suas illesas quas habuerunt tempore
dicti Sancti Regis Edwardi progenitoris sui."&mdash;Letter Book K,
fo. 120 b.</p></note>
This charter has since been lost.</p>

<note place="margin">The strong government of William.</note>

<p>The compact thus made between London and the
Conqueror was faithfully kept by both parties. Having
ascended the English throne by the aid of the citizens
of London, William, unlike many of his successors,
was careful not to infringe the terms of their charter,
whilst the citizens on the other hand continued loyal
to their accepted king, and lent him assistance to put
down insurgents in other parts of the kingdom. The
fortress which William erected within their city's
walls did not disturb their equanimity. It was sufficient
for them that, under the Conqueror's rule, the
country was once more peaceful, so peaceful that, according
to the chronicler, a young maiden could
travel the length of England without being injured
or robbed.<note place="foot"><p>"Tantaque pax suis regnavit temporibus, quod puella virguncula
auro onusta, indempnis et intacta Angliam potuit peragrare."&mdash;Mat.
Paris, Hist. Angl. (Rolls Series No. 44), i, 29.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">"Doomsday" Book completed.</note>

<p>The close of the reign of William the First witnessed
the completion of "Doomsday," or survey of
the kingdom, which he had ordered to be made for
fiscal purposes. For some reason not explained,
neither London nor Winchester&mdash;the two capitals, so to
speak, of the kingdom&mdash;were included in this survey.
It may be that the importance of these boroughs,<pb n="038" /><anchor id="Pg038" />
their wealth and population, necessitated some special
method of procedure; but this does not account for
the omission of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland,
and Durham, from the survey. We know
that Winchester was afterwards surveyed, but no
steps in the same direction were ever taken with respect
to London. The survey was not effected without
disturbances, owing to the inquisitorial power
vested in the commissioners appointed to carry it out.</p>

<note place="margin">Death of William the Conqueror, and accession of his son, 1087.</note>

<p>William died whilst on a visit to his duchy of
Normandy, and "he who was before a powerful
king, and lord of many a land, had then of all his
land, only a portion of seven feet."<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, p. 187. Flor. Wigorn., ii, p. 19.</p></note> the same
which, to this day, holds his mortal remains in the
Abbey at Caen. He was succeeded by William his
son. The death of the father and accession of his
son was marked by fire, pestilence, and famine.<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, p. 187. Flor. Wigorn., ii, p. 19.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">St. Paul's destroyed by fire, 1087.</note>

<p>A fire destroyed St. Paul's and the greater part
of the City. Maurice, Bishop of London, at once
set to work to rebuild the Cathedral on a larger and
more magnificent scale, erecting the edifice upon arches
in a manner little known in England at that time, but
long practised in France. The Norman Conquest was
already working for good. Not only the style of
architecture, but the very stone used in re-building St.
Paul's came from France, the famous quarries of Caen
being utilised for the purpose.<note place="foot"><p>Stow's Survey (Thoms's ed.), p. 121.</p></note></p>

<p>There was already in the city, one church built
after the same manner, and on that account called
St. Mary of Arches or "le Bow."  The object of<pb n="039" /><anchor id="Pg039" /><index index="toc" level1="THE ELECTION OF HENRY I." />
setting churches and other buildings upon vaults was
to guard against fire. Whatever defence against fire
this method of building may have afforded, it was
certainly no defence against wind. In 1091, the roof
of St. Mary-le-Bow was clean blown off, huge baulks
of timber, 26 feet long, being driven into the ground
with such force that scarce 4 feet of them could
be seen.<note place="foot"><p>Malmesbury. ii, 375.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Tower strengthened and the bridge repaired, 1097.</note>

<p>The reign of the new king was one of oppression.
Nevertheless, he continued to secure that protection
for life and property which his father had so successfully
achieved, so that a man "who had confidence in
himself" and was "aught," could travel the length and
breadth of the land unhurt, "with his bosom full of
gold."<note place="foot"><p>Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii, 189.</p></note> He also had an eye for the protection of
the city, and the advancement of its commerce, surrounding
the Tower of London by a wall, and repairing
the bridge which had been nearly washed
away by a flood.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 202.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Election of Henry I by the Witan at Winchester, 1100.</note>

<p>On the 2nd August, 1100, the Red King met his
death suddenly in the New Forest, and the next day
was buried at Winchester. According to a previous
agreement, the crown should have immediately
devolved upon his brother Robert. Crowns, however,
were not to be thus disposed of; they fell only
to those ready and strong enough to seize them.
Robert was far away on a crusade. His younger
brother Henry was on the spot, and upon him fell the
choice of such of the witan as happened to be in or
near Winchester at the time of the late king's death.<note place="foot"><p>"Those of the council who were nigh at hand."&mdash;Anglo-Sax.
Chron., ii, 204.</p></note></p>

<pb n="040" /><anchor id="Pg040" />

<note place="margin">Their choice confirmed by the City of London.</note>

<p>The two days that elapsed before his coronation
at Westminster (5th August), the king-elect spent in
London, where by his easy and eloquent manner, as
well as by fair promises, he succeeded in winning the
inhabitants over to his cause, to the rejection of the
claims of Robert. The election, or perhaps we should
rather say, the selection of Henry by the witan at
Winchester, was thus approved and confirmed by the
whole realm (<hi rend="font-style: italic">regni universitas</hi>), in the city of
London.</p>

<p>The choice was made however on one condition,
viz.:&mdash;that Henry should restore to his subjects their
ancient liberties and customs enjoyed in the days of
Edward the Confessor.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, Hist. Angl. (Rolls Series No. 44) i, 176.</p></note> The charter thus obtained
served as an exemplar for the great charter of liberties
which was to be subsequently wrung from King John.</p>

<note place="margin">Henry's charter to the City of London.</note>

<p>Another charter was granted by the new king&mdash;a
charter to the citizens of London&mdash;granted, as some
have thought, soon after his accession, and by way of
recognition of the services they had rendered him
towards obtaining the crown. This however appears
to be a mistake. There is reason for supposing that
this charter was not granted until at least thirty years
after he was seated on the throne.<note place="foot"><p>See Round's Geoffrey de Mandeville (p. 366), where the writer
conjectures the date of the charter to have been between 1130 and 1135,
and brings evidence in favour of it having been purchased by the
payment of a large sum of money.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The main features of the charter.</note>

<p>The chief features of the grant<note place="foot"><p>Set out under fifteen heads in the City's <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber Albus</hi>. (Rolls
Series) i, 128-129.</p></note> were that the
citizens were thenceforth to be allowed to hold
Middlesex to farm at a rent of £300 a year, and to<pb n="041" /><anchor id="Pg041" /><index index="toc" level1="HENRY'S CHARTER TO THE CITY." />
appoint from among themselves whom they would to
be sheriff over it; they were further to be allowed to
appoint their own justiciar to hold pleas of the
crown, and no other justiciar should exercise authority
over them; they were not to be forced to plead
without the city's walls; they were to be exempt
from scot and lot and of all payments in respect
of Danegelt and murder; they were to be allowed to
purge themselves after the English fashion of making
oath and not after the Norman fashion by wager of
battle; their goods were to be free of all manner of
customs, toll, passage and lestage; their husting court
might sit once a week; and lastly, they might resort
to "withernam" or reprisal in cases where their goods
had been unlawfully seized.</p>

<note place="margin">The grant of Middlesex to ferm, and choice of sheriff.</note>

<p>Touching the true import of this grant of Middlesex
to the citizens at a yearly rent, with the right of
appointing their own sheriff over it, no less than the
identity of the justiciar whom they were to be
allowed to choose for themselves for the purpose of
hearing pleas of the crown within the city, much
divergence of opinion exists. Some believe that
the government of the city was hereby separated
from that of the shire wherein it was situate, and that
the right of appointing their own justiciar which the
citizens obtained by this charter was the right of
electing a sheriff for the city of London in the place
of the non-elective ancient port-reeve. Others deny
that the charter introduced the shire organization into
the government of the city, and believe the justiciar and
sheriff to have been distinct officials.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., i, 404, 405. Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville. p. 356.</p></note> The latter appear
to hold the more plausible view. Putting aside<pb n="042" /><anchor id="Pg042" />
the so-called charter of William the First, granting to
the citizens in express terms <hi rend="font-style: italic">civitatem et vice-comitatum
Londoniæ</hi>, as wanting in corroboration, a
solution of the difficulty may be found if we consider
(1) that the city received a shire organization and
became in itself to all intents and purposes a county
as soon as it came to be governed by a port-reeve, if
not as soon as an alderman had been set over it by
Alfred; (2) that the duties of the shrievalty in respect
of the county of the city of London were at this time
performed either by a port-reeve or by one or more
officers, known subsequently as sheriffs, and (3) that
for the right of executing these duties no rent or ferm
was ever demanded or paid.<note place="foot"><p>The sum of 100 marks of silver recorded (Pipe Roll, 31 Hen. I)
as having been paid for the shrievalty in 1130, appears to have been
more of the nature of a fine than a <hi rend="font-style: italic">firma</hi>.</p></note></p>

<p>If this be a correct view of the matter, it would
appear that the effect of Henry's grant of Middlesex
to the citizens to farm, and of the appointment of a
sheriff over it of their own choice, was not so much
to render the city independent of the shire, as to
make the shire subject to the city. It must be borne
in mind that no sheriff (or sheriffs) has ever been
elected by the citizens for Middlesex alone, the
duties appertaining to the sheriff-wick of Middlesex
having always been performed by the sheriffs of the
city for the time being.<note place="foot"><p>"Whereas from time immemorial there have been and of right
ought to be two sheriffs of this city, which said two sheriffs during all
the time aforesaid have constituted and of right ought to constitute one
sheriff of the county of Middlesex...."&mdash;Preamble to Act of
Common Council, 7th April, 1748, <hi rend="font-style: italic">re</hi> Nomination and election of
Sheriffs. Journal 59, fo. 130b.</p></note> Hence it is that the shrievalty
of London and Middlesex is often spoken of as the
shrievalty of "London" alone, and the shrievalty of<pb n="043" /><anchor id="Pg043" /><index index="toc" level1="THE SHERIFF-WICK OF MIDDLESEX." />
"Middlesex" alone (the same officers executing the
duties of both shrievalties) and the <hi rend="font-style: italic">firma</hi> of £300
paid for the shrievalty of Middlesex alone is sometimes
described as the <hi rend="font-style: italic">firma</hi> of "London," sometimes
of "Middlesex," and sometimes of "London and
Middlesex."<note place="foot"><p>Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, p. 357. Mr. Round's statements
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">op. cit.</hi>, Appendix P), that "this one <hi rend="font-style: italic">firma</hi> ... represents
one <hi rend="font-style: italic">corpus comitatus</hi>, namely Middlesex, inclusive of London," and
that "from this conclusion there is no escape," are more capable of
refutation than he is willing to allow.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The citizens' right to elect their own Justiciar.</note>

<p>The right of electing their own justiciar granted
to the citizens by Henry resolves itself into little more
than a confirmation of the right to elect their own
sheriffs.<note place="foot"><p>"It is probable that whilst the Sheriff in his character of Sheriff
was competent to direct the customary business of the Court, it was in
that of <hi rend="font-style: italic">justitia</hi> that he transacted business under the King's writ."&mdash;Stubbs,
Const. History, i, 389, note.</p></note> Just as sheriffs are known to have held pleas
of the crown in the counties up to the time of the
Great Charter (although their duties were modified by
Henry I, and again by Henry II, when he appointed
Justices in eyre) so in the city of London, no one,
except the sheriffs of London could hold pleas of the
crown, and an attempt made by the Barons in 1258
to introduce a justiciar into the Guildhall was persistently
challenged by the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>"Post hoc prædictus Justitiarius ... accessit ad Gildhalle
Londoniarum, et ibi tenuit placita de die in diem ... et incontinenti ... ilia
terminavit nullo juris ordine observato contra leges
civitatis et etiam contra leges et consuetudines cujuslibet liberi hominis
de regno Anglie. Quod vero cives semper calumpniaverunt, dicentes
quod nullus debet placitare in civitate de transgressionibus ibidem
factis nisi vicecomites Londoniarium."&mdash;Lib. de Ant. (Camd. Soc.),
p. 40.</p></note></p>

<p>Even those who stedfastly maintain that in the
country the sheriff and justiciar grew up to be two
distinct officers, the one representing local interest and
the other imperial, are willing to allow that in the<pb n="044" /><anchor id="Pg044" />
city of London such distinction was evanescent. The
office of justiciar in the city was twice granted <hi rend="font-style: italic">eo
nomine</hi> to Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of Essex, and
it is twice mentioned as having been held by one
named Gervase, who (there is reason to believe) is
identical with Gervase de Cornhill, a Sheriff of London
in 1155 and 1156; but the office became extinct at
the accession of Henry II.<note place="foot"><p>Round. Geoffrey de Mandeville. pp. 107-113, 373, and Appendix K.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">London and the election of Stephen, 1135</note>

<p>The events which followed Henry's decease
afford us another instance of the futility of all attempts
at this early period to settle the succession to the
crown before the throne was actually vacant. The
King's nephew, Stephen of Blois, and the nobility of
England had sworn to accept the King's daughter
Matilda, wife of Geoffery of Anjou, as their sovereign
on the death of her father; yet when that event took
place in 1135, Stephen, in spite of his oath, claimed
the crown as nearest male heir of the Conqueror's
blood.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris (Hist. Angl. i, 251), ascribes the incessant turmoil
of the latter part of the reign to the vengeance of the deity for this
breach of faith.</p></note></p>

<p>There was no doubt of his popularity, whilst
Matilda on the other hand injured her cause by
marrying an Angevin. On the continent a bitter feud
existed between Norman and Angevin; in England
the Norman had steadily increased in favour, and
England's crown was Stephen's if he had courage
enough to seize it.</p>

<p>Landing on the Kentish coast, his first reception
was far from encouraging. Canterbury and Dover, held
by the Earl of Gloucester, refused to acknowledge<pb n="045" /><anchor id="Pg045" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON'S ELECTION OF STEPHEN." />
him and closed their gates on his approach. Undismayed
by these rebuffs, Stephen pushed on to London,
where he was welcomed by every token of good will.
The Londoners had been no party to the agreement
to recognise Matilda as Henry's successor; they had
become accustomed to exercising a right of sharing
in the choice of a king who should reign over them,
and they now chose Stephen. "It was their right,
their special privilege," said they, "on the occasion of
the king's decease, to provide another in his place."<note place="foot"><p>"Id quoque sui esse juris, suique specialiter privilegii, ut si rex
ipsorum quoquo moclo obiret, alius suo provisu in regno substituendus
e vestigio succederet."&mdash;Gesta Stephani (Rolls Series No. 82), iii, 5-6.</p></note>
There was no time to be lost, the country was in
danger, Stephen was at hand, sent to them, as they
believed, by the goodness of Providence. They could
not do better than elect him: and elected he was
by the assembled aldermen or eldermen (<hi rend="font-style: italic">majores
natu</hi>) of the City.</p>

<p>Such is the story of Stephen's election as given
by the author of the "Gesta Stephani," one who
wrote as an eye-witness of what took place, but
whose statements cannot always be taken as those of
an independent chronicler of events. Informal as this
election may have been, it marks an important epoch
in the annals of London. Thenceforth the city
assumes a pre-eminent position and exercises a predominant
influence in the public affairs of the kingdom.<note place="foot"><p>"With the solemn independent election of a king, the great part
which London was to play in England's history had definitely begun."&mdash;Green,
London and her Election of Stephen.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Coronation of Stephen, December, 1135.</note>

<p>From London Stephen went down to Winchester,
where he was heartily welcomed by his brother Henry,<pb n="046" /><anchor id="Pg046" />
recently appointed papal legate. Next to London, it
was important that Stephen should secure Winchester,
and now that London had spoken, the citizens of
Winchester no longer hesitated to throw in their lot
with the king. Winchester secured, and Stephen put
in possession of the royal castle and treasury, he
returned to London, where all doubts as to the
validity or invalidity of his election were set at rest
by the ceremony of coronation (Dec. 1135).</p>

<note place="margin">A great Council held in London, April, 1136.</note>

<p>In the spring of the following year (April 1136),
a brilliant council of the clergy and magnates of the
realm was held in London,<note place="foot"><p>Gesta Stephani (Rolls Series No. 82). iii. 17.</p></note> reminding one of the
Easter courts of the days of the Conqueror which
latterly had been shorn of much of their splendour.
The occasion was one for introducing the new king to
his subjects as well as for confirming the liberties of
the church, and Stephen may have taken special care
to surround it with exceptional splendour as a set off
against the meagreness which had characterised the
recent ceremony of his coronation.<note place="foot"><p>Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, p. 18.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Arrival of the Empress Matilda in England. 1139.</note>

<p>In the meanwhile the injured Matilda appealed
to Rome, but only with the result that her rival
received formal recognition from the Pope. Three
years later (1139) she landed in England accompanied
by her brother, the Earl of Gloucester. She soon
obtained a following, more especially in the west; and
Winchester&mdash;the seat of the royal residence of the
queens of England since the time when Ethelred
presented the city as a "morning gift" to his consort at
their marriage&mdash;became her headquarters and rallying<pb n="047" /><anchor id="Pg047" /><index index="toc" level1="THE EMPRESS MATILDA." />
point for her supporters, whilst London served in the
same way for Stephen.</p>

<note place="margin">Attempted negotiations between Stephen and Matilda, May, 1140.</note>

<p>After nine months of sieges and counter sieges,
marches and counter marches, in which neither party
could claim any decided success, Stephen, as was his
wont, withdrew to London and shut himself up in the
Tower, with only a single bishop, and he a foreigner,
in his train. Whilst safe behind the walls of that
stronghold, negotiations were opened between him and
the empress for a peaceful settlement of their respective
claims (May, 1140), Henry of Winchester
acting as intermediary between the rival parties.<note place="foot"><p>"Eodem anno in Pentecoste resedit rex Londoniæ in Turri, episcopo
tantum modo Sagiensi præsente: ceteri vel fastidierunt vel
timuerunt venire. Aliquanto post, mediante legato, colloquium indictum
est inter imperatricem et regem. si forte Deo inspirante pax reformari
posset."&mdash;Malmesbury, Hist. Nov. (Rolls Series No. 90.), ii, 564.</p></note>
The negotiations ended without effecting the desired
result.</p>

<note place="margin">Matilda formally acknowledged "Lady of England," 1141.</note>

<p>Matters assumed an entirely different aspect when
Stephen was made prisoner at Lincoln in the following
year (2nd Feb., 1141). Henry of Winchester forsook
his rôle of arbitrator, and entered into a formal
compact with the empress who arrived before Winchester
with the laurels of her recent success yet
fresh, agreeing to receive her as "Lady of England,"
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Domina Angliæ</hi>) and promising her the allegiance of
himself and his followers so long as she would keep
her oath and allow him a free hand in ecclesiastical
matters.<note place="foot"><p>"Juravit et affidavit imperatrix episcopo quod omnia majora negotia
in Anglia præcipueque donationes episcopatuum et abbatiarum ejus
nutum spectarent, si eam ipse cum sancta ecclesia in dominam reciperet
et perpetuam ei fidelitatem teneret.... Nec dubitavit episcopus
imperatricem in dominam Angliæ recipere, et ei cum quibusdam suis
affidare, quod, quamdiu ipsa pactem non infringeret ipse quoque fidem
ei custodiret."&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.,</hi> ii, 573.</p></note></p>

<pb n="048" /><anchor id="Pg048" />

<note place="margin">A synod at Winchester, 7th April, 1141.</note>

<p>This compact was entered into on the 2nd March,
and on the following day the empress was received
with solemn pomp into Winchester Cathedral. It
remained for the compact to be ratified. For this
purpose an ecclesiastical synod was summoned to sit
at Winchester on the 7th April. The day was spent
by the legate holding informal communications with
the bishops, abbots, and archdeacons who were in
attendance, and who then for the first time in England's
history claimed the right not only of consecration,
but of election of the sovereign.<note place="foot"><p>"Ventilata est hesterno die causa secreto coram majori parte cleri
Angliæ ad cujus jus potissimum spectat principem eligere, simulque
ordinare."&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 576.</p></note></p>

<p>On the 8th April, Henry in a long speech announced
to the assembled clergy the result of the conclave of
the previous day. He extolled the good government
of the late king who before his death had caused fealty
to be sworn to his daughter, the empress. The delay
of the empress in coming to England (he said) had
been the cause of Stephen's election. The latter had
forfeited all claim to the crown by his bad government,
and God's judgment had been pronounced against him.
Lest therefore, the nation should suffer for want of a
sovereign, he, as legate, had summoned them together,
and by them the empress had been elected Lady of
England. The speech was received with unanimous
applause, those to whom the election did not commend
itself being wise enough to hold their tongue.</p>

<note place="margin">The Londoners summoned to attend the synod.</note>

<p>But there was another element to be considered
before Matilda's new title could be assured. What
would the Londoners who had taken the initiative in
setting Stephen on the throne, and still owed to them<pb n="049" /><anchor id="Pg049" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON AND THE SYNOD AT WINCHESTER." />
their allegiance, say to it? The legate had foreseen the
difficulty that might arise if the citizens, whom he
described as very princes of the realm, by reason of the
greatness of their city (<hi rend="font-style: italic">qui sunt quasi optimates pro
magnitudine civitatis in Anglia</hi>), could not be won
over. He had, therefore, sent a special safe conduct
for their attendance, so he informed the meeting after
the applause which followed his speech had died away,
and he expected them to arrive on the following day.
If they pleased they would adjourn till then.</p>

<note place="margin">They arrive and request the king's release, 9th April, 1141.</note>

<p>The next day (9th April) the Londoners arrived,
as the legate had foretold, and were ushered before
the council. They had been sent, they said, by the so
called "commune" of London; and their purpose was
not to enter into debate, but only to beg for the release
of their lord, the king.<note place="foot"><p>"Missos se a communione quam vocant Londoniarum."&mdash;Malmesbury,
(Hist. Nov.), ii, 576. Exception may be taken to translating
<hi rend="font-style: italic">communio</hi> as 'commune'; but even if the municipal organization
represented by the French term <hi rend="font-style: italic">commune</hi> did not at this period exist in
the City of London in all its fulness, the "communal idea" appears
to have been there.&mdash;Stubbs, Const. Hist., i. 407.</p></note> The statement was supported
by all the barons then present who had entered the
commune of the city<note place="foot"><p>"Omnes barones qui in eorum coramunionem jamdudum recepti
fuerant."&mdash;Malmesbury, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid.</hi></p></note> and met with the approval of
the archbishop and all the clergy in attendance.
Their solicitations, however, proved of no avail. The
legate replied with the same arguments he had
used the day before, adding that it ill became
the Londoners who were regarded as nobles
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">quasi proceres</hi>) in the land to foster those who
had basely deserted their king on the field of battle,
and who only curried favour with the citizens in order
to fleece them of their money.</p>

<pb n="050" /><anchor id="Pg050" />

<note place="margin">Their request backed up by a letter from the Queen.</note>

<p>Here an interruption took place. A messenger
presented to the legate a paper from Stephen's queen
to read to the council. Henry took the paper, and
after scanning its contents, refused to communicate
them to the meeting. The messenger, however, not
to be thus foiled, himself made known the contents of
the paper. These were, in effect, an exhortation by the
queen to the clergy, and more especially to the legate
himself, to restore Stephen to liberty. The legate,
however, returned the same answer as before, and the
meeting broke up, the Londoners promising to communicate
the decision of the council to their brethren
at home, and to do their best to obtain their support.</p>

<note place="margin">The Londoners after much hesitation receive the Empress
into their city, June, 1141.</note>

<p>The next two months were occupied by the
empress and her supporters in preparing the way for
her admission into the city, the inhabitants of which,
had as yet shown but little disposition towards her.
But however great their inclination may have been to
Stephen, they at length found themselves forced to
transfer their allegiance and to offer, for a time at
least, a politic submission to the empress. Accordingly,
a deputation went out to meet her at St. Albans
(May 1141), and arrange terms on which the city
should surrender.<note place="foot"><p>"Proficiscitur inde cum exultatione magna et gaudio, et in monasterio
Sancti Albani cum processionali suscipitur honore et jubilo.
Adeunt eam ibi cives multi ex Lundonia, tractatur ibi sermo multimodus
de reddenda civitate."&mdash;Contin. Flor. Wigorn. (Thorpe), ii, 131.</p></note></p>

<p>More delay took place; and it was not until
shortly before midsummer (1141), that she entered
the city. Her stay was brief. She treated the inhabitants
as vanquished foes,<note place="foot"><p>"Erecta est autem in superbiam intolerabilem, quia suis incerta
belli prosperavissent."&mdash;Hen. of Huntingdon (Rolls Series No. 74), p. 275.</p></note> extorted large sums of<pb n="051" /><anchor id="Pg051" /><index index="toc" level1="THE EMPRESS MATILDA IN LONDON." />
money,<note place="foot"><p>"Infinitæ copiæ pecuniam, non simplici cum mansuetudine sed
cum ore imperioso ab eis exegit."&mdash;Gesta Stephani (Rolls Series
No. 82), iii, 75.</p></note> and haughtily refused to observe the laws
of Edward the Confessor they valued so much, preferring
those of the late king, her father.<note place="foot"><p>"Interpellata est a civibus, ut leges eis regis Edwardi observari
liceret, quia optimæ erant, non patris sui Henrici quia graves erant.
Verum illa non bono usa consilio, præ nimia austeritate non acquievit
eis, unde et motus magnus factus in urbe; et facta conjuratione adversus
eam quam cum honore susceperunt. cum dedecore apprehendere
statuerunt."&mdash;Contin. Flor. Wigorn. (Thorpe), ii, 132.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Empress forced to leave the city.</note>

<p>The consequence was that, within a few days of
her arrival in London, the inhabitants rose in revolt,
drove her out of the city<note place="foot"><p>Malmesbury (Hist. Nov.), ii, 577-578.  "Sed tandem a Londoniensibus
expulsa est in die Sancti Johannis Baptiste proximo sequenti"&mdash;Lib.
de Ant. (Camd. Soc), p. 197.</p></note> and attacked the Tower, of
which Geoffrey de Mandeville was constable, as his
father William had been before him.<note place="foot"><p>"Anno prædicto [<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> 7 Stephen, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1141], statim in illa estate,
obsessa est Turris Lundoniarum a Londoniensibus, quam Willielmus
[<hi rend="font-style: italic">sic</hi>] de Magnaville tenebat et firmaverat."&mdash;Lib. de Ant. (Camd.
Soc.), p. 197. From this it would appear that the father still held
the office of constable. A charter of the empress, however, which
Mr. Horace Round prints in his book on Geoffrey de Mandeville
(pp. 88, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi>) points to the son as being constable at the time.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of Essex, and Constable of the Tower, won over by the Empress.</note>

<p>This Geoffrey de Mandeville had been recently
created Earl of Essex by Stephen, in the hope and
expectation that the fortress over which Geoffrey
was governor, would be held secure for the royal
cause. The newly fledged earl, however, was one
who ever fought for his own hand, and was ready to
sell his fortress and sword to the highest bidder. The
few days that the empress was in the city, afforded
her an opportunity of risking a trial to win over the
earl from his allegiance. To this end she offered to
confirm him in his earldom and to continue him in his
office of Constable of the Tower, conferred upon him<pb n="052" /><anchor id="Pg052" />
by Stephen; in addition to which, she was ready to
allow him to enjoy lands of the rent of £100 a year,
a license to fortify his castles, and the posts of sheriff
and justiciar throughout his earldom. The bait was
too tempting for the earl not to accept; and a charter
to the above effect was drawn up and executed.<note place="foot"><p>Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, pp. 88-95.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Forsakes the Empress for the Queen.</note>

<p>Scarcely had the fickle earl consented to throw
in his lot with the empress before she had to flee the
city. The departure of the empress was quickly
followed by the arrival of her namesake, Matilda, the
valiant queen of the captured Stephen; and again the
earl proved false to his allegiance and actively supported
the queen in concert with the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>It is not to be supposed that the earl consented to assist the queen
without meeting with some return for his services, more especially as
the queen was prepared to go all lengths to obtain her husband's liberty.
See Round's Geoffrey de Mandeville, p. 119.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Capture of Winchester, and release of Stephen, Sept., 1141.</note>

<p>With his aid<note place="foot"><p>"Gaufrido de Mandevilla, qui jam iterum auxilio eorum cesserat,
antea enim post captionem regis imperatrici fidelitatem juraverat, et Londoniensibus
maxime annitentibus, nihilque omnino quod possent prætermittentibus
quo imperatricem contristarent."&mdash;Malmesbury (Hist.
Nov.), ii, 580.</p></note> and the aid of the Londoners,<note place="foot"><p>"Magnæ ex Lundoniis copiæ."&mdash;Newburgh, Hist. Rerum. Angl.
(Rolls Series No. 82.), i, 42. "Cumque invictâ Londoniensium
catervâ."&mdash;Gesta Stephani (Rolls Series No. 82), iii, 80. The Londoners
sacked Winchester mercilessly. "Londonienses, cum maxima
militum regalium parte, modis horrendis Wintoniensem civitatem expilavere."&mdash;Gesta
Stephani, iii, 84.</p></note> the
queen was enabled to reduce Winchester and to effect
the liberation of her husband by exchanging the Earl
of Gloucester, brother of the empress, for the captured
king.</p>

<note place="margin">His second charter to Mandeville.</note>

<p>After being solemnly crowned, for the second
time,<note place="foot"><p>The precedent thus set by Stephen, of submitting to the ceremony
of a second coronation after a period of captivity, was afterwards
followed by Richard I, on his return from captivity abroad.</p></note> at Canterbury, Stephen issued a second charter<pb n="053" /><anchor id="Pg053" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON HOLDS THE BALANCE." />
(about Christmas time, 1141),<note place="foot"><p>This is the date assigned to the charter by Mr. Horace Round,
(Geoffrey de Mandeville, pp. 138-144). <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Appendix to 31st Report
of Deputy Keeper of the Public Records, p. 3.</p></note> to Geoffrey de Mandeville,
confirming and augmenting the previous grant by
the empress. Instead of sheriff and justiciar of his own
county of Essex merely, he is now made sheriff and
justiciar of London and Middlesex, as well as of
Hertfordshire.</p>

<note place="margin">London holds the balance between the rival powers.</note>

<p>But even these great concessions failed to secure
the earl's fidelity to the king. Again he broke away
from his allegiance and planned a revolt in favour of
the empress who recompensed him with still greater
dignities and possessions than any yet bestowed.
This second charter of the empress,<note place="foot"><p>The date assigned by Mr. Round to this charter is between
Christmas, 1141, and the end of June, 1142.</p></note> is remarkable for
a clause in which she promises never to make terms
with the Londoners without the earl's consent,
"because they are his mortal foes."<note place="foot"><p>"Et convenciono eidem Gaufredo Comiti Essex quod dominus
meus Comes Andegavie vel ego vel filii nostri nullam pacem aut
concordiam cum Burgensibus Lund[oniæ] faciemus, nisi concessu et
assensu præ-dicti Comitis Gaufredi quia inimici eius sunt mortales."&mdash;Round's
Geoffrey de Mandeville, p. 168.</p></note> But the plans
of the earl were doomed to be frustrated. The
empress, tired of the struggle, soon ceased to be
dangerous, and eventually withdrew to the continent,
and Stephen was left free to deal with the rebel earl
alone. With the assistance of the Londoners, who
throughout the long period of civil dissension, were
generally to be found on the winning side, and held as
it were the balance between the rival powers, Stephen
managed after considerable bloodshed to capture
the fortifications erected by the Earl at Farringdon.<note place="foot"><p>Newburgh, Hist. Rerum Angl. (Rolls Series No. 82), i. 48. Henry
of Huntingdon (Rolls Series No. 74), p. 278.</p></note></p>

<pb n="054" /><anchor id="Pg054" />

<note place="margin">Arrest of the earl, his freebooting life and death, September, 1143.</note>

<p>The earl was subsequently treacherously arrested
and made to give up his castles. Thenceforth his
life was that of a marauding freebooter, until, fatally
wounded at the siege of Burwell, he expired in September,
1143.</p>

<note place="margin">Arrival of Henry of Anjou in England, 1153</note>

<p>Notwithstanding the absence of the empress and
the death of the faithless earl, a desultory kind of war
continued to be carried on for the next ten years on
behalf of Henry of Anjou, son of the empress. In
1153 that prince arrived in England to fight his own
battles and maintain his right to the crown, which the
king had already attempted to transfer to the head of
his own son Eustace. This attempt had been foiled
by the refusal of the bishops, at the instigation of the
pope, to perform the ceremony. The sudden death
of Eustace made the king more ready to enter into
negotiations for effecting a peaceful settlement.</p>

<note place="margin">Peace concluded between Stephen and Henry at Winchester, November, 1153.</note>

<note place="margin">Henry conducted to London.</note>

<p>A compromise was accordingly effected at Winchester,<note place="foot"><p>Sometimes called the Treaty of Wallingford.</p></note>
whereby Stephen was to remain in undisputed
possession of the throne for life, and after his
death was to be succeeded by Henry. The news
that at last an end had come to the troubles which
for nineteen years had disturbed the country, was
received with universal joy, and Henry, conducted to
London by the king himself, was welcomed in a
manner befitting one who was now the recognised heir
to the crown.<note place="foot"><p>The general joy is depicted in glowing colours by Henry of
Huntingdon, (p. 289.) <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Anglo-Sax. Chron., ii., 235.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="055" /><anchor id="Pg055" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER III.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="FITZ-STEPHEN'S DESCRIPTION OF LONDON" /><head></head>
<note place="margin">Fitz-Stephen's description of London.</note>

<p>Both London and Winchester had been laid in
ashes during Stephen's reign, the former by a conflagration&mdash;which
took place in 1136, again destroying
St. Paul's and extending from London Bridge to the
church of St. Clement Danes&mdash;the latter by the
burning missiles used in the conflict between Stephen
and the empress in 1141. Winchester never recovered
her position, and London was left without a rival.
Fitz-Stephen, who wrote an account of the city as it
stood in the reign of Henry II, describes it as holding
its head higher than all others; its fame was wider
known; its wealth and merchandise extended further
than any other; it was the capital of the kingdom
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">regni Anglorum sedes</hi>).<note place="foot"><p>Fitz-Stephen's Stephanides, Stow's Survey (Thoms's ed.), p. 208.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Thomas of London.</note>

<p>It was through the mediation of an intimate
friend and fellow citizen of Fitz-Stephen that Archbishop
Theobald had invited Henry of Anjou over
from France in 1153. Thomas of London, better
known as Thomas Becket, although of foreign descent,
was born in the heart of the city, having first seen the
light in the house of Gilbert, his father, some time
Portreeve of London, situate in Cheapside on a site
now occupied by the hall and chapel of the Mercers'
Chapel. Having been ordained a deacon of the
Church, he became in course of time clerk or chaplain<pb n="056" /><anchor id="Pg056" />
to the archbishop. Vigorous and active as he was,
Thomas soon made his influence felt, and it was owing
to his suggestion (so it is said<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, v., 325.</p></note>) that the bishops had
declined to be a party to the coronation of Eustace
during Stephen's lifetime.</p>

<p>On the accession of Henry, Thomas passed from
the service of the archbishop, then advanced in years,
to the service of the young king. He was raised to
the dignity of chancellor, and became one of the
king's most trusted advisers. By their united efforts
order was once again restored throughout the kingdom.
The great barons, who had established themselves
in castles erected without royal licence, were
brought into subjection to the crown and compelled
to pull down their walls. Upon the death of the
archbishop, Thomas was appointed to the vacant See
(1162). From that day forward the friendship between
king and archbishop began to wane. Henry found
that all his attempts to establish order in his kingdom
were thwarted by exemptions claimed by the archbishop
on behalf of the clergy. He found that
allegiance to the Crown was divided with allegiance
to the Pope, and this state of things was likely to
continue so long as the archbishop lived. Becket's
end is familiar to us all. His memory was long
cherished by the citizens of London, who made many
a pilgrimage to the scene of his martyrdom and left
many an offering on his tomb in the cathedral of
Canterbury. It is hard to say for which of the two,
the father or the son, the citizens entertained the
greater reverence. For many years after his death it
was the custom for the Mayor of the City for the<pb n="057" /><anchor id="Pg057" /><index index="toc" level1="CHARTER OF HENRY II TO THE CITY." />
time being, upon entering into office, to meet the
aldermen at the church of St. Thomas of Acon&mdash;a
church which had been erected and endowed in
honour of the murdered archbishop by his sister
Agnes, wife of Thomas Fitz-Theobald of Helles<note place="foot"><p>A cartulary of the Mercers' Company contains a copy of a grant
from Thomas Fitz-Theobald to the hospital of St. Thomas of Acon of
"all that land, with the appurtenances, which was formerly of Gilbert
Becket, father of the Blessed Thomas the Martyr, Archbishop of
Canterbury, where the said Blessed Thomas the Martyr was born
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">duxit originem</hi>), to build a church (<hi rend="font-style: italic">basilicam</hi>) in honour of
Almighty God and the Blessed Virgin Mary, and of the same most
glorious martyr."&mdash;Watney, Account of the Hospital of St. Thomas
of Acon (privately printed 1892), pp. 9, 237.</p></note>&mdash;and
thence to proceed to the tomb of Gilbert
Becket, the father, in St. Paul's churchyard, there to
say a <hi rend="font-style: italic">De profundis</hi>; after which both mayor and
aldermen returned to the church of St. Thomas, and,
each having made an offering of two pence, returned
to his own home.<note place="foot"><p>Liber Albus (Rolls Series), i, pp. 26, 27.</p></note> St. Thomas's Hospital, in Southwark,
was originally dedicated to the murdered
archbishop, but after its dissolution and subsequent
restoration as one of the Royal Hospitals, its patron
saint was no longer Thomas the Martyr, but Thomas
the Apostle.</p>

<note place="margin">Charter of Henry II to the City of London.</note>

<p>Whilst the king and his chancellor were busy
settling the kingdom, establishing a uniform administration
of justice and system of revenue, and not only
renewing but extending the form of government which
had been instituted by Henry I, the citizens of London,
availing themselves of the security afforded by a strong
government, redoubled their energy in following commercial
pursuits and succeeded in raising the city, as
Fitz-Stephen has told us, to a pitch of prosperity far
exceeding that of any other city in the world.</p>

<pb n="058" /><anchor id="Pg058" />

<p>They obtained a charter from Henry,<note place="foot"><p>This charter (with fragment of seal) is preserved at the Guildhall.
It bears no date, but appears to have been granted between 1154 and 1161.</p></note> although
of a more limited character than that granted to
them by his grandfather. The later charter, for
instance, although in the main lines following the
older charter, makes no mention of Middlesex being
let to ferm nor of any appointment of sheriff or justiciar
being vested in the citizens. It appears as if
Henry was determined to bring the citizens no less
than the barons of the realm within more direct and
immediate subservience to the crown. The concession
made by the king's grandfather had been ignored by
Stephen and the empress Matilda, each of whom in
turn had granted the shrievalty of London and Middlesex
to the Earl of Essex. For a time the appointment
of sheriffs was lost to the citizens. Throughout
the reigns of Henry II and his successor they were
appointed by the crown. Richard's charter to the
citizens makes no mention of the sheriffwick, nor
is it mentioned in the first charter granted by John.
When it was restored to the citizens (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1199), by
John's second charter, the office of sheriff of London
had lost much of its importance owing to the introduction
of the communal system of municipal government
under a mayor.</p>

<note place="margin">The Inquest of sheriffs, 1170.</note>

<p>In the meantime the sheriffs of the counties, who
had by reason of Henry's administrative reforms, risen
to be officers of greater importance and wider jurisdiction,
and who had taken advantage of their positions to
oppress the people during the king's prolonged absence
abroad, were also made to feel the power of the crown.
A blow struck at the sheriffs was calculated to weaken<pb n="059" /><anchor id="Pg059" /><index index="toc" level1="THE REVOLT OF THE BARONS" />
the nobility and the larger landowners&mdash;the class from
which it had been the custom hitherto to select these
officers. Henry saw the advantage to be gained, and
on his return to England in 1170 deposed most of the
sheriffs and ordered a strict enquiry to be made, as to
the extortions they had committed in his absence.
Their places were filled for the most part by men of
lower rank, and therefore likely to be more submissive.
Some, however, were reinstated and became more cruel
and extortionate than ever.<note place="foot"><p>Contin. Flor. Wigorn., ii, 138.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The revolt of the barons, 1174.</note>

<p>The last fifteen years of Henry's life were full of
domestic trouble. He had always found it an easier
matter to rule his kingdom than his household. His
sons were for ever thwarting his will and quarrelling
with each other. It was his desire to secure the
succession to the crown for his eldest son Henry, and
to this end he had caused him to be crowned by the
Archbishop of York (14th June, 1170), who was
thereupon declared excommunicated by his brother
of Canterbury. The son began to clamour for his
inheritance whilst his father still lived, and appealed
in 1173 to the French king, whose daughter he had
married, to assist him in his unholy enterprise. Whilst
Henry was engaged in defending his crown against
his own son on the continent, the great barons of
England rose in insurrection, and the king was obliged
to hasten home, where he arrived in July, 1174. The
rebellion was quickly put down, and the strife between
king and nobles for a time ceased.</p>

<note place="margin">Disturbances in the city, 1174-1177.</note>

<p>In the city there were occasional disturbances
caused by the younger nobility&mdash;the young bloods of<pb n="060" /><anchor id="Pg060" />
the city<note place="foot"><p>"De filiis et parentibus nobilium civitatis" and again "filii et
nepotes quorundam nobilium civium Londoniarum."&mdash;Benedict of
Peterborough (Rolls Series No. 49), ii, 155.</p></note>&mdash;who infested the streets at night, broke
into the houses of the rich and committed every
kind of excess. In 1177 the brother of the Earl
of Ferrers was waylaid and killed, and for some time
the streets were unsafe at night. The chronicler records
a singular outrage perpetrated three years before, by
these sprigs of nobility. They forcibly entered the
house of a wealthy citizen whose name has not come
down to us, he is simply styled the <hi rend="font-style: italic">pater-familias</hi>.
Of his courage we are left in no doubt, for we are
told that he slipt on a coat of mail, armed his house-hold,
and awaited the attack. He had not long to
wait. The leader of the band&mdash;one Andrew Bucquinte
soon made his appearance, and was met by
a pan of hot coals. Swords were drawn on both
sides and <hi rend="font-style: italic">pater-familias</hi>, whose coat of mail served
him well, succeeded in cutting off the right hand of
his assailant. Upon the cry of thieves being raised,
the delinquents took to their heels, leaving their
leader a prisoner.  The next day, being brought
before the king's justiciar, he informed against his
companions. This cowardly action on the part of
Bucquinte led to many of them being taken, and
among them one who is described by the chronicler
as the noblest and wealthiest of London citizens, but
to whom the chronicler gives no other name than
"John, the old man" (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Johannes Senex</hi>). An offer was
made to John to prove his innocence by what was
known as the ordeal by water,<note place="foot"><p>By a strange anomaly, a man who underwent ordeal by water
was only adjudged innocent if he sank to the bottom and was drowned.
Hence the old man's caution!</p></note> but the offer was<pb n="061" /><anchor id="Pg061" /><index index="toc" level1="RICHARD I AND HIS CHANCELLOR." />
declined, and he was eventually hanged. The whole
story looks suspicious.</p>

<note place="margin">The last days of Henry II. 1177-1189.</note>

<p>Having settled the succession of the crown of
England upon his eldest son, the king put his second
son, Richard, into possession of the Duchy of Aquitaine,
and provided for his third son, Geoffrey, by
marriage with the heiress of Brittany. There was
yet another son, John, who was too young to be provided
for just now, and who being without any territory,
assigned to him, acquired the name of Lackland.
Both Richard and Geoffrey had taken the part of their
brother Henry in 1173, and in 1177 the three brothers
were again quarrelling with their father and with each
other. After the deaths of Henry and Geoffrey, the
quarrel was taken up by the surviving brothers,
Richard and John.</p>

<p>In all these&mdash;more or less&mdash;petty wars with his
sons, the king had always to deal with the ruler of
France. At last, in 1189, the loss of Le Mans&mdash;his
own birth-place&mdash;and the unexpected discovery that
his youngest and best beloved son, John, had turned
traitor towards him, left the king nothing to live for,
and after a few days suffering he died, ill and worn
out, at Chinon.</p>

<note place="margin">Accession of Richard I, and administration of Longchamp, 1189-1190.</note>

<p>Richard had scarcely succeeded to the throne,
before he set out on a crusade, leaving the government
of his country in the hands of William Longchamp,
Bishop of Ely, as chancellor.<note place="foot"><p>Roger de Hoveden (Rolls Series No. 51), iii, 28. According to
Richard of Devizes (Rolls Series No. 82, iii, 387), Longchamp obtained
the chancellorship by bribery.</p></note> With him was associated
in the government, Hugh de Puiset, or Pudsey,
Bishop of Durham, but Longchamp soon got the<pb n="062" /><anchor id="Pg062" />
supreme control of affairs into his own hands, and
commenced to act in the most tyrannical fashion. He
increased the security of the Tower of London, which
had been committed to his charge, by surrounding it
with a moat,<note place="foot"><p>Benedict (Rolls Series No. 49). ii, 106.</p></note> and having got himself nominated papal
legate, made a progress through the country committing
the greatest extortion.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, 143.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Longchamp opposed by Prince John, 1191.</note>

<note place="margin">Arrival of Longchamp in London; the citizens divided, 7th October, 1191.</note>

<p>Report of the Chancellor's conduct having reached
the ears of Richard, he despatched the Archbishop
of Rouen to England with a new commission, but
the worthy prelate on arrival (April, 1191), was afraid
to present the commission, preferring to let matters
take their course.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, 158.</p></note> Already a fierce rivalry had
sprung up between the chancellor and John, the
king's brother, who, for purposes of his own, had espoused
the cause of the oppressed. Popular feeling
at length became so strong, that Longchamp feared
to meet John and the bishops, and, instead of going
to Reading, where his attendance was required, he
hastened to London. Arriving there (7 Oct.), he
called the citizens together in the Guildhall, and prayed
them to uphold the King against John, whom he denounced
as aiming plainly at the Crown. The leading
men in the city at the time were Richard Fitz-Reiner
and Henry de Cornhill. These took opposite sides,
the former favouring John, whilst the latter took the
side of the chancellor.<note place="foot"><p>Preface to Roger de Hoveden, iii, p. lxxvii.  Girald. Cambr.
Vita Galfridi (Rolls Series No. 21). iv, 397.</p></note> John's party proving the
stronger of the two, Longchamp thought it safest to
seek refuge in the Tower.<note place="foot"><p>Richard of Devizes, iii, 414. Benedict, ii, 213.</p></note></p>

<pb n="063" /><anchor id="Pg063" />

<index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND ITS &quot;COMMUNE.&quot;" />

<note place="margin">John admitted into the city.</note>

<p>As soon as John found that the chancellor had
gone to London instead of Reading, he too hastened
thither. On his arrival he was welcomed and hospitably
entertained by Richard Fitz-Reiner who gave
him to understand on what terms he might expect the
support of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Ralph de Diceto (Rolls Series No. 68), ii, 99. Girald. Cambr.
(Vita Galfridi). iv, 397-398. Roger de Hoveden, iii. 140.</p></note> As to terms, John was ready to
accede to any that might be proposed.</p>

<note place="margin">A meeting of barons and citizens in St. Paul's, 8 Oct., 1191.</note>

<note place="margin">Longchamp deposed and John recognised as head of the kingdom.</note>

<p>The next day (8 Oct.), a meeting of the barons
of the realm, as well as of the citizens of London,
was convened in St. Paul's Church, to consider the
conduct of the chancellor, and it was thereupon
decided that Longchamp should be deposed from
office. The story, as told by different chroniclers,<note place="foot"><p>Richard of Devizes. (Rolls Series No. 82), iii. 415. Benedict,
213. Girald. Cambr. (Vita Galfridi), iv, 405.</p></note>
varies in some particulars, but the main features are
the same in all. The king's minister was set aside,
John was recognised as the head of the kingdom,
and new appointments made to judicial,
fiscal, and military offices. The Archbishop of
Rouen, who attended the council, seeing the turn
affairs had taken, no longer hesitated to produce the
letters under the king's sign manual appointing a new
commission for the government of the kingdom.</p>

<note place="margin">John grants or confirms to the citizens their commune.</note>

<p>The same day that witnessed the fall of Longchamp
was also a memorable one in the annals of the
City of London; for immediately after judgment had
been passed on the chancellor, John and the assembled
barons granted to the citizens "their commune,"
swearing to preserve untouched the dignities of the
city during the king's pleasure.  The citizens on<pb n="064" /><anchor id="Pg064" />
their part swore fealty to King Richard, and declared
their readiness to accept John as successor to the
throne in the event of his brother dying childless.<note place="foot"><p>"Johannes comes frater regis et archiepiscopus Rothomagensis,
et omnes episcopi, comites et barones regni qui aderant, concesserunt
civibus Lundoniarum communam suam, et juraverunt quod ipsi eam et
dignitates civitatis Lundoniarum custodirent illibatas, quandiu regi
placuerit. Et cives Lundoniarum et epispcopi et comites et barones
juraverunt fidelitates regi Ricardo, et Johanni comiti de Meretone fratri
ejus salva fidelitate, et quod illum in dominum suum et regem reciperent,
si rex sine prole decesserit."&mdash;Benedict of Peterborough
(Rolls Series No. 49), ii, 214. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Roger de Hovedene (Rolls Series
No. 51), iii, 141; Walter de Coventry (Rolls Series No. 58), ii, 5-6.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Change of name from port-reeve to mayor.</note>

<p>This is the first public recognition of the citizens
of London as a body corporate; but so far from
granting to them something new, the very words
<hi rend="font-style: italic">their</hi> commune (<hi rend="font-style: italic">communam suam</hi>) imply a commune
of which they were <hi rend="font-style: italic">de facto</hi>, if not <hi rend="font-style: italic">de jure</hi> already in
enjoyment. How long the commune may have been
in existence, unauthorised by the crown, cannot be
determined; but that the term <hi rend="font-style: italic">communio</hi> in connection
with the city's organization was known half a century
before, we have already seen;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Supra</hi> p. 49.</p></note> and, according to
the opinion of Giraldus Cambrensis, there is no valid
distinction between the words <hi rend="font-style: italic">communio</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">communa</hi>
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">communia</hi>.<note place="foot"><p>"In crastino vero convocatis in unum civibus, communione, vel
ut Latine minus vulgariter magis loquamur, communa seu communia
eis concessa et communiter jurata."&mdash;Vita Galfridi, iv, 405.</p></note> Bishop Stubbs, however, hesitates
to translate <hi rend="font-style: italic">communio</hi> as "commune," the latter being
essentially a French term for a particular form of
municipal government. He prefers to render it "commonalty,"
"fraternity," or "franchise," although he
goes so far as to allow that the term "suggests
that the communal idea was already in existence as
a basis of civic organization" in Stephen's reign, an
idea which became fully developed in the succeeding<pb n="065" /><anchor id="Pg065" /><index index="toc" level1="SUBSTITUTION OF MAYOR FOR PORT-REEVE." />
reign.<note place="foot"><p>Const. Hist., i, 407.</p></note> He is also in favour of dating the foundation of
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">communa</hi> in London from this grant by John and
the barons,<note place="foot"><p>Referring to the year 1191, he writes, "we have the date of the
foundation of the commune."&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 629.</p></note> and in this view he is supported by
Richard of Devizes, who distinctly states that the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">communia</hi> of London was instituted on that occasion,
and that it was of such a character that neither
King Richard nor Henry his father would have conceded
it for a million marks of silver, and that a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">communia</hi> was in fact everything that was bad. It
puffed up the people, it threatened the kingdom, and
it emasculated the priesthood.<note place="foot"><p>"Concessa est ipsa die et instituta communia Londoniensium, in
quam universi regni magnates et ipsi etiam ipsius provinciæ episcopi
jurare coguntur. Nunc primum in indulta sibi conjuratione regno
regem deesse cognovit Londonia quam nec rex ipse Ricardus, nec
prædecessor et pater ejus Henricus, pro mille millibus marcarum
argenti fieri permisisset. Quanta quippe mala ex conjuratione proveniant
ex ipsa poterit diffinitione perpendi, quæ talis est&mdash;communia
tumor plebis, timor regni, tepor sacerdotii."&mdash;Chron. Stephen, Hen.
II, Ric. I (Rolls Series No. 82), iii, 416.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Change of name from port-reeve to mayor.</note>

<p>With the change from a shire organization to
that of a French <hi rend="font-style: italic">commune</hi>, whenever that happened
to take place, there took place also a change in the
chief governor of the city. The head of the city was
no longer a Saxon "port-reeve" but a French "mayor,"
the former officer continuing in all probability to perform
the duties of a port-reeve or sheriff of a town
in a modified form. From the time when this "civic
revolution"<note place="foot"><p>"It is impossible to avoid a suspicion," writes Bishop Stubbs,
"that the disappearance of the port-reeve and other changes in the
municipal government, signify a civic revolution, the history of which
is lost."&mdash;Const. Hist., i, 406n.</p></note> occurred, down to the present day, the
sheriff's position has always been one of secondary
importance, being himself subordinate to the mayor.</p>

<pb n="066" /><anchor id="Pg066" />

<note place="margin">When did the change take place?</note>

<p>The earliest mention of a mayor of London in a
formal document is said to occur in a writ of the reign
of Henry II.<note place="foot"><p>Merewether and Stephens, Hist. of Boroughs (1835), i, 384.
No authority, however, is given for this statement.</p></note> The popular opinion, however, is that
a change in the name of the chief magistrate of the
City of London took place at the accession of
Richard I. What gave rise to this belief is hard to
say, but it is not improbable that it arose from a statement
to be found in an early manuscript record still
preserved among the archives of the Corporation, and
known as the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber de Antiquis Legibus</hi>.<note place="foot"><p>The entire MS. was published in Latin by the Camden Society
in 1846; and a translation of the original portion of the work was
afterwards made by the late Mr. H. T. Riley, under the title "Chronicles
of the Mayors and Sheriffs of London, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1188 to <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1274."</p></note> The
original portion of this manuscript purports to be a
chronicle of mayors and sheriffs from 1188 down to
1273, noticing briefly the chief events in each year,
and referring to a few particulars relative to the year
1274.</p>

<p>After naming the sheriffs who were appointed at
Michaelmas, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1188, "the first year of the reign of
King Richard,"<note place="foot"><p>"The correct date of the accession of Richard has never been
ascertained. No records appear to be extant to fix the commencement
of the reign of any king before the accession of John."&mdash;Nicholas,
Chronology of Hist., p. 285.</p></note> it goes on to say that "in the
same year Henry Fitz-Eylwin of Londenestane was
made mayor of London, who was the first mayor of
the city, and continued to be such mayor to the end
of his life, that is to say, for nearly five and twenty
years." That Henry Fitz-Eylwin was mayor in
the first year of Richard's reign is stated no less
than three times in the chronicle.<note place="foot"><p>Fos. 45, 63 and 63b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="067" /><anchor id="Pg067" /><index index="toc" level1="CHRONICLE OF ARNALD FITZ-THEDMAR." />

<note place="margin">Arnald Fitz-Thedmar, the compiler of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber de Antiquis</hi>.</note>

<p>The compiler of the chronicle is supposed to have
been Arnald or Arnulf Fitz-Thedmar,<note place="foot"><p>Or simply Thedmar.</p></note> an Alderman
of London, although it is not known over which ward
he presided. Particulars of his life are given in the
volume itself, from which we gather that he was a
grandson on the mother's side of Arnald de Grevingge<note place="foot"><p>It is thus that Riley reads the word which to me appears to be
capable of being read "Grennigge."</p></note>
a citizen of Cologne; that his father's name was
Thedmar, a native of Bremen; that he was born on
the vigil of St. Lawrence [10 August] <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1201, his
mother being forewarned of the circumstances that
would attend his birth in a manner familiar to biblical
readers; that he was deprived of his aldermanry by
the king, but was afterwards restored; that he became
supporter of the king against Simon de Montfort and
the barons, and that he was among those whom
Thomas Fitz-Thomas, the leader of the democratic
party and his followers, had "intended to slay"
on the very day that news reached London of the
battle of Evesham, which crushed the hopes of Montfort
and his supporters. The date of his death cannot
be precisely determined, but there can be but little
doubt that it took place early in the third year of
the reign of Edward the First, inasmuch as his
will was proved and enrolled in the Court of
Husting, London, held on Monday, the morrow of
the Feast of St. Scolastica [10 Feb.] of that year
(<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1274-5).<note place="foot"><p>Calendar of Wills. Court of Husting, London, part. I., p. 22.
From another Will, that of Margery, relict of Walter de Wynton, and
one of Fitz-Thedmar's sisters&mdash;she is described as daughter of
"Thedmar, the Teutonic"&mdash;it appears that other sisters of Fitz-Thedmar
married into the well-known city families of Eswy and Gisors.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>,
part i, p. 31.</p></note></p>

<pb n="068" /><anchor id="Pg068" />

<p>Setting aside the statement&mdash;namely that mention
is made of a mayor of London, in a document of the
reign of Henry II&mdash;as wanting corroboration, the
first instance known at the present day of any such
official being named in a formal document occurs
in 1193 when the Mayor of London appears among
those who were appointed treasurers of Richard's
ransom.<note place="foot"><p>"Ibi etiam dispositium est, penes quem pecunia collata debeat
residere: scilicet sub custodia Huberti Walteri Cantuariensis electi, et
domini Ricardi Lundoniensis episcopi, et Willelmi comitis de Arundel
et Hamelini comitis de Warenna et majoris Lundoniarum."&mdash;Roger
de Hoveden (Rolls Series No. 51), iii, 212.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The title of Mayor, first mentioned in a Royal Charter of 1202.</note>

<p>Richard's first charter to the City (23 April, 1194)<note place="foot"><p>Preserved at the Guildhall.</p></note>
granted a few weeks after his return from abroad
makes no mention of a mayor, nor does the title
occur in any royal charter affecting the City until the
year 1202, when John attempted to suppress the guild
of weavers "at the request of our mayor and citizens
of London." A few years later when John was ready
to do anything and everything to avoid signing the
Great Charter which the barons were forcing on him,
he made a bid for the favour of the citizens by granting
them the right to elect annually a mayor, and thus their
autonomy was rendered complete.</p>

<note place="margin">Richard's return from captivity, March, 1194.</note>

<p>When Richard recovered his liberty and returned
to England he was heartily welcomed by all except
his brother John. One of his first acts was to visit
the City and return thanks for his safety at St. Paul's.<note place="foot"><p>Ralph de Diceto (Rolls Series No. 68), ii, p. 114.</p></note>
The City was on this occasion made to look its brightest,
and the display of wealth astonished the foreigners
in the King's suite, who had been led to believe that<pb n="069" /><anchor id="Pg069" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY'S CLAIM AT CORONATION BANQUETS." />
England had been brought to the lowest stage of
poverty by payment of the King's ransom.<note place="foot"><p>"Denique ad ingressum principis ita ornata est facies amplissimæ
civitatis ut Alemanni nobiles qui cum ipso venerant et redemptione
regia exinanitam bonis Angliam credebant opum magnitudine obstupescerent."&mdash;William
of Newburgh (Rolls Series No. 82), i, p. 406.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Is crowned for the second time.</note>

<note place="margin">The custom of the Mayor assisting the Chief Butler at coronation banquets.</note>

<p>In order to wipe out the stain of his imprisonment,
he thought fit to go through the ceremony of coronation
for the second time. His first coronation had
taken place at Westminster (3 Sept., 1189,) soon after
his accession, and the citizens of London had duly
performed a service at the coronation banquet&mdash;a
service which even in those days was recognised as an
"ancient service"&mdash;namely, that of assisting the chief
butler, for which the mayor was customarily presented
with a gold cup and ewer. The citizens of the rival
city of Winchester performed on this occasion the
lesser service of attending to the viands.<note place="foot"><p>"Cives vero Lundonienses servierunt de pincernaria, et cives
Wintonienses de coquina."&mdash;Roger de Hoveden (Rolls Series No.
51), iii, 12.</p></note></p>

<p>The second coronation taking place at Winchester
and not at Westminster, the burgesses of the former
city put in a claim to the more honourable service
over the heads of the citizens of London, and the
latter only succeeded in establishing their superior
claim by a judicious bribe of 200 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Brit. Mus., Harl. MS. 3,504, fo. 248.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Heavy taxation.</note>

<p>Richard was ever in want of money, and cared
little by what means it was raised. He declared himself
ready to sell London itself if a purchaser could
be found.<note place="foot"><p>"Si invenissem emptorem Londoniam vendidissem."&mdash;Richard of
Devizes (Rolls Series No. 82), iii, 388.</p></note> The tax of Danegelt, from which the
citizens of London had been specially exempted by<pb n="070" /><anchor id="Pg070" />
charter of Henry I, and which had ceased to be
exacted under Henry II, mainly through the interposition
of Thomas of London, was practically
revived under a new name. The charter already
mentioned as having been granted to the citizens by
Richard after his return from captivity was probably
purchased, for one of the king's regular methods of
raising money was a lavish distribution of charters to
boroughs, not from any love he had for municipal
government, but in order to put money in his purse.
As soon as Richard had collected all the money he
could raise in England, he again left the country,
never to return.</p>

<note place="margin">The rising in the city under Longbeard. 1196.</note>

<p>The pressure of taxation weighed heavily on the
poor, and occasioned a rising in the city under the
leadership of William Fitz-Osbert. The cry was that
the rich were spared whilst the poor were called upon
to pay everything.<note place="foot"><p>"Frequentius enim solito . . imponebantur eis auxilia non modica
et divites, propriis parcentes marsupiis volebant ut pauperes solverent
universa."&mdash;Roger de Hoveden (Rolls Series No. 51), iv. 5. "Ad
omne edictum regium divites, propriis fortunis parcentes, pauperibus
per potentiam omne onus imponerent."&mdash;Newburgh, (Rolls Series
No. 82), ii. 466.</p></note> Accounts of the commotion differ
according as the writer favoured the autocratic or
democratic side. One chronicler, for instance, finds
fault with Fitz-Osbert's personal appearance, imputing
his inordinate length of beard&mdash;he was known as
"Longbeard"&mdash;to his desire for conspicuousness,
and declares him to have been actuated by base
motives.<note place="foot"><p>Newburgh, ii., 466.</p></note></p>

<p>Others describe him as a wealthy citizen of the
best family, and yet as one who ever upheld the cause<pb n="071" /><anchor id="Pg071" /><index index="toc" level1="INSURRECTION UNDER LONGBEARD." />
of the poor against the king's extortions.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 57.  A similar character is given him by
Roger de Hoveden.  Dr. S. R. Gardiner describes him as an
alderman of the city, and as advocating the cause of the poor artisan
against the exactions of the wealthier traders.&mdash;Students' History of
England, i, 169.</p></note> Whatever
may have been the true character of the man and the
real motive of his action, it is certain that he had a
large following. When Hubert Walter, the justiciar,
sent to arrest him, "Longbeard" took refuge in the
church of St. Mary-le-Bow. Thither he was followed
by the king's officers&mdash;described by a not impartial
chronicler as men devoid of truth and piety and
enemies of the poor.<note place="foot"><p>"Pauperum et veritatis ac pietatis adversarii."&mdash;Mat. Paris, ii. 57.</p></note>&mdash;who with the aid of fire
and faggot soon compelled him to surrender. On his
way to the Tower, he was struck at and wounded by
one whose father (it was said) he had formerly killed;<note place="foot"><p>Newburgh, ii, 470.</p></note>
but this again may or may not be the whole truth.
A few days later he and a number of his associates
were hanged.<note place="foot"><p>"And for the time," adds Dr. Gardiner, "the rich tradesmen
had their way against the poorer artisans."&mdash;Students' History of
England, i, 170.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richard's so-called second charter ordering the removal of wears in the Thames, 14 July, 1197.</note>

<p>Two years before his death at Chaluz, Richard,
with the view of aiding commerce, caused the wears
in the Thames to be removed, and forbade his wardens
of the Tower to demand any more the toll that had
been accustomed. The writ to this effect was dated
from the Island of Andely or Les Andelys on the
Seine, the 14th July, 1197, in the neighbourhood of
that fortress which Richard had erected, and of
which he was so proud&mdash;the Château Gaillard
or "Saucy Castle," as he jestingly called it. The reputation
which the castle enjoyed for impregnability<pb n="072" /><anchor id="Pg072" />
under Richard, was lost under his successor on the
throne.</p>

<note place="margin">First mention of a deliberative municipal body in the city, 1200.</note>

<p>Soon after John's accession we find what appears
to be the first mention of a court of aldermen as a
deliberative body. In the year 1200, writes Thedmar
(himself an alderman), "were chosen five and twenty
of the more discreet men of the city, and sworn to
take counsel on behalf of the city, together with
the mayor."<note place="foot"><p>Chronicles of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 2.</p></note> Just as in the constitution of the realm,
the House of Lords can claim a greater antiquity than
the House of Commons, so in the city&mdash;described by
Lord Coke as <hi rend="font-style: italic">epitome totius regni</hi>&mdash;the establishment
of a court of aldermen preceded that of the common
council.</p>

<note place="margin">The council held at St. Paul's, 25th Aug., 1213.</note>

<p>When, after thirteen years of misgovernment,
during which John had enraged the barons and
excited general discontent by endless impositions,
matters were brought to a climax by his submission
to the pope, it was in the city of London that the
first steps were taken by his subjects to recover their
lost liberty. On the 25th August, 1213, a meeting of
the clergy and barons was held in the church of
St. Paul; a memorable meeting, and one that has
been described as "a true parliament of the realm,
though no king presided in it."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, v, 709.</p></note> Stephen Langton,
whose appointment as Archbishop of Canterbury
had so raised John's ire, took the lead and produced
to the assembly a copy of the Charter of Liberties,
granted by Henry I, when that king undertook to
put an end to the tyranny of William Rufus. If
the barons so pleased, it might (he said) serve as a<pb n="073" /><anchor id="Pg073" /><index index="toc" level1="THE GOLDEN BULL." />
precedent. The charter having been then and there
deliberately read, the barons unanimously declared
that for such liberties they were ready to fight, and,
if necessary, to die.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 143. Roger of Wendover (Rolls Series No. 84),
ii, 83-87.</p></note></p>

<p>The clergy and people who had hitherto supported
the king against the barons, having now engaged themselves
to assist the barons against the tyranny of the
king, John found himself with but one friend in the
world, and that was the Pope. "Innocent's view of
the situation was very simple," writes Dr. Gardiner,
"John was to obey the Pope, and all John's subjects
were to obey John." Within a few weeks of the
council being held at St. Paul's, the same sacred
edifice witnessed the formality of affixing a golden <hi rend="font-style: italic">bulla</hi>
to the deed&mdash;the detestable deed (<hi rend="font-style: italic">carta detestabilis</hi>)&mdash;whereby
John had in May last resigned the crown
of England to the papal legate, and received it again
as the Pope's feudatory.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, 146.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Meeting of the barons at Bury St. Edmunds, 1214.</note>

<p>In the following year (1214), whilst the king was
abroad, the barons met again at Bury St. Edmunds,
and solemnly swore that if John any longer delayed
restoring the laws and liberties of Henry the First,
they would make war upon him. It was arranged
that after Christmas they should go in a body and
demand their rights, and that in the meantime they
should provide themselves with horses and arms, with
the view of bringing force to bear, in case of refusal.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> ii, 153.</p></note>
The citizens at the same time took the opportunity of
strengthening their defences by digging a foss on the
further side of the city wall.<note place="foot"><p>Ann. of Bermondsey (Rolls Series No. 36), in, 453.</p></note></p>

<pb n="074" /><anchor id="Pg074" />

<note place="margin">Open hostility between John and the barons, 1215.</note>

<p>Christmas came and a meeting between John
and the barons took place in London at what was
then known as the "New" Temple. The result,
however, was unsatisfactory, and both parties prepared
for an appeal to force, the barons choosing as their
leader Robert Fitz-Walter, whom they dubbed
"Marshal of the army of God and of Holy Church."<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 154-156.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Robert Fitz-Walter, castellain of London.</note>

<p>This Fitz-Walter was Baron of Dunmow in Essex,
the owner of Baynard's Castle in the City of London,
and lord of a soke, which embraced the whole of the
parish known as St. Andrew Castle Baynard. He
moreover enjoyed the dignity of castellain and chief
bannerer or banneret of London. The rights and
privileges attaching to his soke and to his official
position in time of peace were considerable, to judge
from a claim to them put forward by his grandson
in the year 1303. Upon making his appearance in
the Court of Husting at the Guildhall, it was the
duty of the Mayor, or other official holding the court,
to rise and meet him and place him by his side.
Again, if any traitor were taken within his soke or
jurisdiction, it was his right to sentence him to death,
the manner of death being that the convicted person
should be tied to a post in the Thames at the Wood
Wharf, and remain there during two tides and two
ebbs.<note place="foot"><p>As to the services and franchises of Fitz-Walter, both in time of
peace and war, see Lib. Cust., (Rolls Series), part i, pp. 147-151.</p></note></p>

<p>In later years, however, upon an enquiry being
held by the Justiciars of the Iter (a° 14 Edward II,
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</hi> 1321), the claimant was obliged to acknowledge
that he had disposed of Baynard's Castle in the time<pb n="075" /><anchor id="Pg075" /><index index="toc" level1="FITZ-WALTER THE CITY'S CASTELLAIN." />
of Edward I, but had especially reserved to himself
all rights attaching to the castle and barony, although
he very considerately declared his willingness to forego
the right and title enjoyed by his ancestor of drowning
traitors at Wood Wharf.<note place="foot"><p>Introd. to Lib. Cust, p. lxxvii.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Duties of the castellain of the City in time of war.</note>

<p>But it was in time of war that Fitz-Walter
achieved for himself the greatest power and dignity.
It then became the duty of the castellain to proceed
to the great gate of St. Paul's attended by nineteen
other knights, mounted and caparisoned, and having
his banner, emblazoned with his arms, displayed before
him. Immediately upon his arrival, the mayor, aldermen,
and sheriffs, who awaited him, issued solemnly
forth from the church, all arrayed in arms, the
mayor bearing in his hand the city banner, the
ground of which was bright vermilion or gules, with
a figure of St. Paul, in gold, thereon, the head, feet,
and hands of the saint being silver or argent, and
in his right hand a sword.<note place="foot"><p>The sword of St. Paul, emblematic possibly of his martyrdom,
still remains in the City's coat of arms. It has often been mistaken for
the dagger with which Sir William Walworth is said to have killed
Wat Tyler.</p></note> The castellain, advancing
to meet the mayor, informed him that he had
come to do the service which the city had a right
to demand at his hands, and thereupon the mayor
placed the city's banner in his hands, and then, attending
him back to the gate, presented him with a charger of
the value of £20, its saddle emblazoned with the
arms of Fitz-Walter, and its housing of cendal or silk,
similarly enriched.</p>

<p>A sum of £20 was at the same time handed to
Fitz-Walter's chamberlain to defray the day's expenses.<pb n="076" /><anchor id="Pg076" />
Having mounted his charger, he bids the Mayor to
choose a Marshal of the host of the City of London;
and this being done, the communal or "mote-bell" is
set ringing, and the whole party proceed to the Priory
of Holy Trinity at Aldgate. There they dismount,
and entering the Priory, concert measures together for
the defence of the city. There is one other point
worthy of remark, touching the office of chief banneret,
and that is that on the occasion of any siege
undertaken by the London forces, the castellain was
to receive as his fee the niggardly sum of one hundred
shillings for his trouble, and no more.</p>

<note place="margin">Feud between Fitz-Walter and King John.</note>

<p>It is not improbable that Fitz-Walter's election
as leader of the remonstrant barons was in some
measure due to his official position in the city. It is
also probable, as Mr. Riley has pointed out, that the
unopposed admission of the barons into the city, on
the 24th May, 1215, may have been facilitated by
Fitz-Walter's connexion, as castellain, with the Priory
of Holy Trinity, situate in the vicinity.</p>

<p>But there were other reasons for selecting Fitz-Walter
as their leader at this juncture. If the story
be true, Fitz-Walter had good reason to be bitterly
hostile to King John, for having caused his fair
daughter Maude or Matilda to be poisoned, after
having unsuccessfully made an attempt upon her
chastity.<note place="foot"><p>The story is told in Mr. Riley's Introduction to the Liber Custamarum
(p. lxxix), on the authority of the Chronicle of Dunmow.</p></note> This is not the only crime of the kind laid
to the charge of this monarch,<note place="foot"><p>He is said to have made a similar attempt upon the wife of
Eustace de Vesci, a leading baron.&mdash;(Blackstone, Introd. to Magna
Carta, pp. 289, 290).</p></note> and there appears to
be too much reason for believing most of the charges<pb n="077" /><anchor id="Pg077" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON AND THE GREAT CHARTER." />
against him to be true. It is certain that Fitz-Walter
was one of the first to entertain designs against John,
and that he and Eustace de Vesci, on whose family
the king is said to have put a similar affront, were
forced to escape to France. The story how Fitz-Walter
attracted John's notice by his prowess at a tournament
in which he was engaged on the side of the French,
and was restored to the King's favour and his own
estates, is familiar to all.</p>

<note place="margin">The Barons admitted into the City, May, 1215.</note>

<p>After a feeble attempt to capture Northampton,
the barons, with Fitz-Walter at their head, accepted
an invitation from the citizens of London to enter the
city. They made their entry through Aldgate.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 156. A different complexion, however, is put on
this event by another chronicler. According to Walter de Coventry
(Rolls Series, No. 58, ii, 220) the barons made their way into the City
by stealth, scaling the walls at a time when most of the inhabitants
were engaged in divine service, and having once gained a footing
opened all the City gates one after another.</p></note></p>

<p>The concession which John had recently made to
the citizens, viz.:&mdash;the right of annually electing their
own mayor<note place="foot"><p>By charter, date 8th May, 1215, preserved at the Guildhall.</p></note>&mdash;had failed to secure their allegiance.
The city became thenceforth the headquarters of the
barons,<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 159, 161, 164, 186.</p></note> and the adhesion of the Londoners was
followed by so great a defection from the King's party
(including among others that of Henry de Cornhill),
that he was left without any power of resistance.<note place="foot"><p>Roger of Wendover (Rolls Series No. 84), ii, 117.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city and Magna Carta, 15th June, 1215.</note>

<p>The citizens met their reward for fidelity to the
barons when John was brought to bay at Runnymede.
In drafting the articles of the Great Charter the barons,
mindful of their trusty allies, made provision for the
preservation of the city's liberties, and the names of<pb n="078" /><anchor id="Pg078" />
Fitz-Walter and of the mayor of the city appear
among those who were specially appointed to see that
the terms of the charter were strictly carried out.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Select Charters, p. 298.</p></note></p>

<p>By way of further security for the fulfilment of
the articles of the charter the barons demanded and
obtained the custody of the City of London, including
the Tower, and they reserved to themselves the right
of making war upon the king if he failed to keep his
word. For a year or more the barons remained in
the city, having entered into a mutual compact with
the inhabitants to make no terms with the king without
the consent of both parties.<note place="foot"><p>"Moram autem faciebant barones in civitate Londoniæ per annum
et amplius cum civibus confœderati, permittentes se nullam pacem
facturos cum rege nisi assensu utriusque partis."&mdash;Annals of Waverley
(Rolls Series No. 36), ii, 283.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Open war between John and the barons.</note>

<p>The right of resistance thus established was soon
to be carried into execution. Before the year was
out, John had broken faith, and was besieging Rochester
with the aid of mercenaries. An attempt to raise
the siege failed, owing to the timidity (not to say
cowardice) of Fitz-Walter, who, like the rest of the
barons, was inclined to be indolent so soon as the
struggle with the king was thought to have ended.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 161, 165.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">London under an interdict.</note>

<p>The Pope supported his vassal king. For a
second time during John's reign London was placed
under an interdict. The first occasion was in 1208,
when the whole of England was put under an interdict,
and for six years the nation was deprived of all
religious rites saving the sacraments of baptism and
extreme unction.<note place="foot"><p>Contin. Flor. Wigorn. ii, 167, 171. Chron. of Mayors and
Sheriffs, p. 3.</p></note> It was then the object of Innocent<pb n="079" /><anchor id="Pg079" /><index index="toc" level1="DEATH OF KING JOHN." />
to stir up resistance against John by inflicting sufferings
on the people, now his purpose was to punish
the people for having risen against John.</p>

<note place="margin">The arrival of the Dauphin, May, 1216.</note>

<note place="margin">Death of John, 19th October, 1216.</note>

<p>The barons saw no other course open to them
but to invite Louis the Dauphin to come and undertake
the government of the kingdom in the place of
John. On the 21st May, 1216, Louis landed at
Sandwich and came to London, where he was welcomed
by the barons. Both barons and citizens paid
him homage, whilst he, on his part, swore to restore
to them their rights, to maintain such laws of the
realm as were good, and to abolish those (if any)
that were bad.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, p. 179.</p></note> Suspicion, however, had been aroused
against Louis by the confession of a French nobleman
who had come over in his train, and who had solemnly
declared on his deathbed that his master had sworn
when once on the throne of England to banish all
John's enemies.<note place="foot"><p>Confession of the Vicomte de Melun.&mdash;Mat. Paris, ii, 187.</p></note> Just when matters seemed to be
approaching a crisis and the barons were wavering in
their allegiance, John died (19th October, 1216).</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="080" /><anchor id="Pg080" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IV.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">The barons desert Louis.</note>

<p>Although London remained faithful to Louis after
John's death, the barons began to desert him, one by
one (<hi rend="font-style: italic">quasi stillatim</hi>),<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 200.</p></note> and to transfer their allegiance
to John's eldest son, a boy of nine years of age, who
had been crowned at Gloucester soon after his father's
death, the disturbed state of the country not allowing
of his coming to London for the ceremony.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 4.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Defeat of Louis at Lincoln, 20th May, 1217.</note>

<p>After his defeat at Lincoln (20th May, 1217), by
William the Marshal, Earl of Pembroke, one of Henry's
guardians, Louis beat a hasty retreat to London and
wrote to his father, the French king, to send him
military assistance, for without it he could neither
fight nor get out of the country.</p>

<note place="margin">Fitz-Walter and Muntfichet made prisoners.</note>

<p>Among the prisoners taken at Lincoln were
Robert Fitz-Walter, and a neighbour of his in the
ward of Castle Baynard, Richard de Muntfichet, who,
like Fitz-Walter, had also suffered banishment in 1213.
The tower or castle of Muntfichet lay a little to the
west of Baynard's Castle, and was made over in 1276
by Gregory de Rokesle, the mayor, and citizens of
London to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the
purpose of erecting a new house for the Dominican
or Black Friars, in place of their old house in Holborn.<note place="foot"><p>Strype, Stow's Survey, 1720, Bk. i, p. 62. They had settled
in Holborn soon after their arrival in 1220.</p></note>
We hear little of Fitz-Walter after this, beyond the<pb n="081" /><anchor id="Pg081" /><index index="toc" level1="THE TREATY OF LAMBETH." />
facts that he soon afterwards obtained his freedom,
that he went on a crusade, and continued a loyal
subject to Henry until his death in 1235. He is said
to have been in the habit of wearing a precious stone
suspended from his neck by way of a charm, which
at his last moments he asked his wife to remove in
order that he might die the easier.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 385.</p></note></p>


<note place="margin">London invested by the Earl Marshal.</note>

<p>A French fleet which had been despatched in
answer to Louis was defeated off Dover by Hubert de
Burgh, who had gallantly held that town for John,
and continued to hold it now for Henry. London
itself was invested by the Marshal, and threatened
with starvation; but before matters came to extremes,
Louis intimated his willingness to come to terms.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 218, 220.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Treaty of Lambeth, 11th Sept., 1217.</note>

<p>A meeting was held on the 11th of September
(some say at Kingston,<note place="foot"><p>Liber de Ant. fol. 38. According to this authority (fol. 38b),
the peace was ratified 23rd September, at Merton.</p></note> others at Staines<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 222.</p></note>), and a
peace concluded.<note place="foot"><p>Often spoken of as the Treaty of
Lambeth (Rymer's Fœdera, i, 148.)</p></note> Louis swore fealty to the Pope
and the Roman Church, for which he was absolved
from the ban of excommunication that had been
passed on him, and surrendered all the castles and
towns he had taken during the war. He, further,
promised to use his influence to obtain the restoration
to England of the possessions that had been lost
beyond the sea.</p>

<note place="margin">Departure of Louis after borrowing a sum of money from the citizens.</note>

<p>Henry, on his part, swore to preserve to the barons
and the rest of the kingdom, all those liberties which
they had succeeded in obtaining from John. Everything
being thus amicably settled, Louis went to London,<pb n="082" /><anchor id="Pg082" />
and, after borrowing a large sum of money from his
former trusty supporters, betook himself back to his
native country.<note place="foot"><p>The sum mentioned by Matthew Paris (ii. 224) is £5,000 sterling,
but according to a marginal note in the Liber de Ant. (fol. 39) it
would appear to have been only £1,000, which, according to the compiler
of that record, Louis repaid the Londoners as soon as he arrived
home, out of pure generosity (<hi rend="font-style: italic">mera liberalitate sua</hi>). On the other
hand, Matthew Paris (ii, 292) under the year 1227, narrates that Henry
extorted from the citizens of London 5,000 marks of silver, on the
ground that that was the sum paid by the Londoners to Louis on his
departure, to the king's prejudice.</p></note> The general pardon which was
granted by the young king extended to the Londoners,
who became reconciled and received back their lands,<note place="foot"><p>Walter of Coventry. (Rolls Series No. 58), ii, 239.</p></note>
but did not extend to the clergy, who were left to the
tender mercy of the papal legate.</p>

<note place="margin">Attempt by Constantine Fitz-Athulf or Olaf, to raise a cry in favour of Louis, 1222.</note>

<p>For some years to come there remained a party in
the city who cherished the memory of Louis, and the
cry of "Mountjoy!" the war-cry of the French king&mdash;was
sufficient to cause a riot as late as 1222, when
Constantine Fitz-Athulf or Olaf, an ex-sheriff of
London, raised the cry at a tournament, in order to
test the feeling of the populace towards Louis. Any
serious results that might have arisen were promptly
prevented by Hubert de Burgh, the justiciar, who very
quickly sought out the ringleader, and incontinently
caused him and two of his followers to be hanged at
the Elms in Smithfield. Whilst the halter was round
his neck, Fitz-Athulf offered 15,000 marks of silver for
his life. The offer was declined. He was not to be
allowed another chance of stirring up sedition in the
city.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 251, 252.</p></note></p>

<p>A more circumstantial account of this event is
given us by another chronicler,<note place="foot"><p>Roger of Wendover, (Rolls Series No. 84), ii, 265, 267.</p></note> who relates that the<pb n="083" /><anchor id="Pg083" /><index index="toc" level1="TUMULT RAISED BY CONSTANTINE." />
wrestling match which took place on the festival of
Saint James (25th July),&mdash;the same as that mentioned
by Matthew Paris&mdash;was held at Queen Matilda's
hospital in the suburbs,<note place="foot"><p>Probably Saint Giles in the Fields, a hospital founded by Matilda,
wife of Henry I.</p></note> and was a match between
the citizens of London and those outside; that victory
declared itself in favour of the Londoners, and that their
opponents, and among them the steward of the Abbot
of Westminster, thereupon left in high dudgeon. With
thoughts of revenge in their hearts, the latter caused
invitations to be issued for another match to be held
at Westminster, on the following feast of Saint Peter
ad Vincula (1st August).</p>

<p>It was at this second and later match that the
trouble began. The steward was not content with
collecting the most powerful athletes he could find,
but caused them to seize weapons and to attack the
defenceless citizens who had come to take part in the
games. The Londoners hurried home, bleeding with
wounds, and immediately took counsel as to what
was best to be done. Serlo, the mercer, who had
held the office of mayor of the city for the past five
years, and was of a peaceable disposition, suggested
referring the matter to the abbot; and it was then that
Constantine, who had a large following, advocated an
attack upon the houses of the abbot and of his steward.
No sooner said than done, and many houses had already
suffered before the justiciar appeared upon the scene
with a large force. As to the seizure of Constantine
and his subsequent execution, the chroniclers agree.</p>

<p>Constantine's fellow citizens were very indignant
at the indecent haste with which the justiciar had<pb n="084" /><anchor id="Pg084" />
caused his execution to be carried out, and did not
fail to bring the matter up in judgment against him,
when, some ten years later, Hubert de Burgh himself
fell into disgrace.<note place="foot"><p>"Cives autem Londonienses, qui eundem H[ubertum] propter suspendium
Constantini oderant, lætati sunt de tribulalionibus suis, et
ilico conquesti sunt de eo, quod concivem suum injuste suspendit, et
absque judicio."&mdash;Mat. Paris, ii, 345.</p></note> The result was, that the
justiciar took refuge in the Priory of Merton. When
the citizens received the king's orders to follow
him there, and to take him dead or alive, they
obeyed with unconcealed joy. They allowed little
time to elapse, but set out at once, 20,000 strong,
ready to tear him limb from limb; but luckily they
were stopped in time by another message from the
king, and Hubert obtained a respite.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 346, 347. Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 6, 7.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The foreign element in the country.</note>

<p>At the time of Constantine's execution, there was
real danger to be anticipated from raising the cry in
favour of any foreigner. The land was already
swarming with foreigners, and in that very year
(viz. 1222), the archbishop had been under the necessity
of summoning a council of bishops and nobles to
be held in London, owing to dissensions that had
arisen between the Earl of Chester, William of Salisbury,
the king's uncle, and Hubert de Burgh, and to a
rumour that had got abroad, that foreigners were
inciting the Earl of Chester to raise an insurrection.<note place="foot"><p>"Dicebabur enim ... quod alienigenæ qui plus regni perturbationem
desiderabant quam pacem, præfatum comitem Cestriæ ad
domini sui regis infestationem et regni inquietationem inducere conarentur."&mdash;Walter
of Coventry, ii, 251.</p></note></p>

<p>A few years later, the country was over-run by a
brood of Italian usurers who battened on the inhabitants,
reducing many to beggary. When attempts<pb n="085" /><anchor id="Pg085" /><index index="toc" level1="THE KINGDOM OVER-RUN BY FOREIGNERS." />
were made to rid the city of these pests, they
sheltered themselves under the protection of the
Pope.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 382, 384, iii, 90.</p></note></p>

<p>Throughout the reign of Henry III, there was
one continuous struggle against foreign dominion,
either secular or ecclesiastical. In this struggle,
none took a more active part than the citizens of
London, and "when [in 1247], the nobles, clergy, and
people of England put forth their famous letter
denouncing the wrongs which England suffered at
the hands of the Roman bishop, it was with the seal
of the city of London, as the centre of national life
that the national protest was made."<note place="foot"><p>Freeman, Norman Conquest, v, 469, 470. "Et quia communitas
nostra sigillum non habet, præsentes literas signo communitatis
civitatis Londoniarum vestræ sanctitati mittimus consignatas."&mdash;Mat.
Paris, iii, 17.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin"> The city's struggle against encroachment by the king.</note>

<p>Side by side with this struggle another was being
carried on, a struggle for the liberty of the subject
against the tyranny and rapacity of the king. More
especially was this the case with the city. Henry
was for ever invading the rights and liberties of the
citizens. Thus in 1239, he insisted upon their admitting
to the shrievalty one who had already been
dismissed from that office for irregular conduct, and
because they refused to forego their chartered right of
election and to appoint the king's nominee, the city
was deprived of a mayor for three months and more.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 7, 8.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city "taken into the king's hand" on the most frivolous pretences.</note>

<p>The substitution of a <hi rend="font-style: italic">custos</hi> or warden appointed
by the king for a mayor elected by the citizens, and
of bailiffs for sheriffs,&mdash;a procedure known as "taking
the city into the king's hands,"&mdash;was frequently<pb n="086" /><anchor id="Pg086" />
resorted to both by Henry and his successors, and
notably by Edward I, in whose reign the city was
deprived of its mayor, and remained under government
of a <hi rend="font-style: italic">custos</hi> for thirteen consecutive years
(1285-1298).<note place="foot"><p>French Chronicle (Camden Soc., No. 28), ed. by Aungier (Riley's
translation), pp. 241-244.</p></note></p>

<p>Any pretext was sufficient for Henry's purpose.
If the citizens harboured a foreigner without warrant,
not only was the city taken into the king's hand, but
the citizens were fined £1,000,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 11.</p></note> a sum equal to at
least £20,000 at the present day. A widow brings an
action for a third part of her late husband's goods in
addition to her dower. The case goes against her in
the Court of Husting, and is heard on appeal before
the king's justiciar sitting at St. Martin's-le-Grand.
The verdict is not set aside, but some flaw is discovered
in the mode of procedure; the explanation
of the citizens is deemed insufficient, and the mayor
and sheriffs are forthwith deposed, to be reinstated
only on the understanding that they will so far forego
their chartered right&mdash;viz.: of not impleading nor being
impleaded without the walls of their city&mdash;as to consent
to attend the king's court at Westminster, where
finally, and after considerable delay, they are acquitted.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 13, 14, 16.</p></note></p>

<p>Take another instance. The king had shown an
interest in the Abbey Church of Westminster, and
had caused a new chapel to be built in 1220, he himself
laying the first stone. Thirty years later, or
thereabouts, he made certain concessions to the Abbot
of Westminster&mdash;what they were we are not told&mdash;but
it is certain that they, in some way or other,<pb n="087" /><anchor id="Pg087" /><index index="toc" level1="TAKEN INTO THE KING'S HAND." />
infringed the rights of the citizens of London in the
County of Middlesex. The king promised to compensate
them for the loss they would sustain; but
failing to get their consent by fair promises, he
resorted to his favourite measure of taking the city
into his own hands. For fifteen years the dispute
between the citizens and the Abbot as to their
respective rights in the County of Middlesex was kept
alive, and was at last determined by a verdict given
by the barons of the exchequer, which completely
justified<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 16, 17, 61. Mat. Paris, iii.,
62, 80-81.</p></note> the attitude taken up by the citizens of
London.</p>

<note place="margin">Money extorted from the Jews as well as the citizens for
payment of the king's tradesmen.</note>

<p>In 1230 he extorted a large sum of money from
the citizens at a time when he was meditating an
expedition to the continent for the purpose of
recovering lost possessions. The citizens, however,
were not the only sufferers. The religious houses
were heavily mulcted, as were also the Jews, who,
whether they would or not, were made to give up
one third of their chattels.<note place="foot"><p>Mat. Paris, ii, 323.</p></note> Again in 1244, the
citizens of London and the Jews were made to open
their purse-strings that the king might the better be
able to pay his wine merchant, his wax chandler, and
his tailor; but even then his creditors were not paid
in full.<note place="foot"><p>"Quia dominus rex obligabatur de debitis non minimis erga
mercatores de vino, de cera, de pannis ultramarinis, a civibus pecuniam
multam extorsit et Judæis, nec tamen inde mercatores plenam pacationem
receperunt."&mdash;Mat. Paris, ii, 496.</p></note></p>

<p>Only once does it appear that the king's conscience
pricked him for the extortions he was continually
practising on the citizens. This was in 1250, when<pb n="088" /><anchor id="Pg088" />
he called the citizens together at Westminster, and
begged their forgiveness for all trespasses, extortions
of goods and victuals under the name of "prises," and
for forced loans or talliages. Seeing no other way
out of it, the citizens acceded to his request.<note place="foot"><p>"Cives tanien videntes aliud sibi non expedire, omnia benigne
remiserunt."&mdash;Mat. Paris, iii, 72.</p></note> As
recently as the previous year (1249) he had exacted
from them a sum of £2,000.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, iii, 43.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The coronation of king and queen, 1236.</note>

<p>Henry had been crowned at Gloucester soon after
his accession.<note place="foot"><p>Ann. of Worcester (Rolls Series No. 36), iv., 407.</p></note> Nevertheless he was again crowned&mdash;this
time in London in 1236, after his marriage with
Eleanor of Provence. The city excelled itself in doing
honour to the king and queen as they passed on their
way to Westminster: but the joy of the citizens was
damped by the king refusing to allow Andrew Bukerel
the mayor to perform the customary service of
assisting the chief butler at the coronation banquet.
It was not a time for raising questions of etiquette, so
the mayor pocketed the affront, preferring to settle
the question of the city's rights at some more convenient
time, rather than damp the general joy of the
company by pressing his claim.<note place="foot"><p>"Unde, ne exorta contentione lætitia nuptialis nubilaretur, salvo
cujuslibet jure, multa ad horam perpessa sunt, quæ in tempore
opportuno fuerant determinanda."&mdash;Mat. Paris, Hist. Angl., ed. 1684,
P. 355. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> City Records, Liber Ordinationum, fo. 193 b. Brit. Mus.
Cotton MS. Vespasian, C. xiv. fos. 113-114.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's custom of formally taking leave of his citizens
before going abroad.</note>

<p>Yet, notwithstanding his manifestly unjust treatment
of the citizens of London, and the cynical
contempt with which he looked upon their ancient
claim to the title of "barons," he usually went through
the formality of taking leave of them at Paul's Cross<pb n="089" /><anchor id="Pg089" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON SUPPORTS THE BARONS." />
or at Westminster, before crossing the sea to Gascony<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 9, 20, 45, 53.</p></note>
and was not above making use of them when compelled
to sell his plate and jewels to satisfy his debts. In
1252, he even went so far as to grant them a charter
of liberties, but for this concession the citizens had to
pay 500 marks.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 21.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Mad Parliament, 11th June, 1258.</note>

<p>It is scarcely to be wondered at if, when the
crisis arrived, and king and barons found themselves
in avowed hostility, the citizens of London joined the
popular cause. By the month of June, 1258, the
barons had gained their first victory over Henry.
He was forced to accept the Provisions of Oxford,
passed by the Mad Parliament,<note place="foot"><p>An early instance of this parliament being so designated is found
in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber de Antiquis</hi> of the City's Records (fol. 75b.) where the
words <hi rend="font-style: italic">insane parliamentum</hi> occur.</p></note> as it came to be called
in derision. The Tower of London was transferred
to the custody of the barons, and they were for the
future to appoint the justiciar. Towards the end of
July, a deputation from the barons waited upon the
mayor and citizens to learn if they approved of the
agreement that had been made with the king.<note place="foot"><p>This agreement between the king and barons is termed a "Charter"
by Fitz-Thedmar, who says it bore the seals of the king and of many
barons.&mdash;Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 41.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Citizens throw in their lot with the Barons.</note>

<p>The mayor, aldermen, and citizens, after a hasty
consultation, gave their assent, but with the reservation
"saving unto them all their liberties and customs,"
and the city's common seal was set to the so-called
"charter" which the deputation had brought.</p>

<note place="margin">Hugh Bigod the baron's justiciar in the city, 1258.</note>

<p>It was not long before the city discovered that
the barons were as little likely to respect its liberties
as the king himself. Hugh Bigod, whom they had<pb n="090" /><anchor id="Pg090" />
appointed justiciar gave offence by the way he
exercised his office. In spite of all remonstrance he
insisted upon sitting at the Guildhall to hear pleas,
a jurisdiction which belonged exclusively to the
sheriffs. He summoned the bakers of the city to
appear before him, and those who were convicted of
selling bread under weight he punished, in a way that
was not in conformity with city usage.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 43.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king takes leave of the citizens. November, 1259.</note>

<p>In November of the following year (1259), Henry
took occasion of his departure for the continent to
make some popular concessions to the citizens. He
appeared at a Folkmote, which was being held at
Paul's Cross, and, before taking leave, he announced
that in future the citizens should be allowed to plead
their own cases (without employing legal aid) in all
the courts of the city, excepting in pleas of the
crown, pleas of land, and of wrongful distress. On
the same day John Mansel who had been one of
the king's justiciars in 1257, when the city was "taken
into the king's hand," and Fitz-Thedmar had been
indicted and deprived of his aldermanry for upholding
the privileges of the citizens<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 33-39.</p></note>&mdash;publicly acknowledged
on the king's behalf the injustice of Fitz-Thedmar's
indictment, and announced that Henry not only
recalled him to favour, but commanded that he should
be restored to his former position.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 45, 46.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's return from abroad, April, 1260.</note>

<p>During the king's absence abroad, the barons'
cause was materially strengthened by the support
afforded Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester, by
the king's son. Upon hearing of the defection
of his son, Henry hurried back to England.<pb n="091" /><anchor id="Pg091" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AT THE MERCY OF THE KING." />
A consultation took place in the city as to the attitude
which the citizens ought to take up, with the result
that when Henry appeared (April, 1260), both he and
the Earl of Gloucester were admitted into the city,
whilst the Earl of Leicester and "Sir Edward," as
the chronicler styles the king's son, had to find
accommodation in the suburbs.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 47.</p></note></p>

<p>Henry was now master of the situation. The
city was his, and he determined that it should remain
so. Strict watch was kept over the gates, which for
the most part, were kept shut night and day in order
to prevent surprise. Every inhabitant of the age of
twelve years and upwards was called upon to take an
oath of allegiance before the alderman of his ward,
and those of maturer age were bound to provide
themselves with arms. The king, who now ruled
again in his own way, stirred the anger of the barons,
by presuming to appoint Philip Basset, his chief
justiciar, without first asking their assent; and the
barons retaliated by removing the king's sheriffs, and
appointing "wardens of the counties" in their stead.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 52.</p></note>
In June 1261, Henry produced a Bull of Alexander IV,
annulling the Provisions of Oxford, and freeing him
from his oath.<note place="foot"><p>The Bull was confirmed by Alexander's successor Pope Urban IV.
and the later Bull was read at Paul's Cross, by the king's orders in the
following year (1262), <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 53.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king summoned to observe the Provisions of Oxford. 1263.</note>

<p>For eighteen months the king reigned supreme.
The barons could do nothing, and the Earl of Leicester,
finding their cause hopeless, withdrew in August (1261)
to France, and remained there until the spring of
1263, when he returned as the unquestioned head of<pb n="092" /><anchor id="Pg092" />
the baronial party, to take up arms against the king.
The citizens professed loyalty to Henry, who was residing
in the Tower, and bound themselves by oath to
acknowledge his son Edward as heir to the crown.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 56.</p></note>
At Whitsuntide, the barons sent a letter to the king
requiring him to observe the Provisions of Oxford,
and shortly afterwards, addressed another letter to the
citizens "desiring to be certified by them whether
they would observe the said ordinances and statutes
made to the honour of God in fealty to his lordship
the king, and to his advantage of all the realm, or
would, in preference, adhere to those who wished
to infringe the same."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 57.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Arrangements made between the king, the barons, and
the city, July, 1263.</note>

<p>Before sending a reply, the citizens had an interview
with the king in the Tower, to whom they
showed the barons' letter. The result was, that
Henry availed himself of their services to mediate
between him and the barons. A deputation of citizens
accordingly travelled to Dover, where an understanding
was arrived at between the hostile parties.
The citizens were prepared to support the barons,
subject to their fealty to the king and saving their
own liberties; whilst the king promised to dismiss his
foreign supporters&mdash;the real cause of all the mischief.
Hugh le Despenser, whom Henry had deposed, was
again installed justiciar of all England in the Tower;
and the king and his family left the city for Westminster,
the day after the barons entered it. "Thus
was a league made between the barons and the
citizens with this reservation&mdash;'saving fealty to his
lordship the king.'"<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 58.</p></note></p>

<pb n="093" /><anchor id="Pg093" /><index index="toc" level1="ORGANIZATION OF CRAFT GUILDS." />

<note place="margin">Organization of the Craft Guilds under Fitz-Thomas
the Mayor. 1262.</note>

<p>Whilst the commons of England were thus
winning their way to liberty, the commons of the city
were engaged in a similar struggle with the aristocratic
element of the municipal government.  The craft
guilds cried out against the exclusiveness of the more
wealthy and aristocratic trade guilds, the members of
which monopolized the city's rule. They found an
able champion of their cause in the person of Thomas
Fitz-Thomas, the mayor for the time being (1261-1265).
The mayor's action in the matter disgusted
Fitz-Thedmar, the city alderman and chronicler, who
complains that he "so pampered the city populace,"
that they styled themselves the "commons of the
city," and had obtained the first voice in the city.
The mayor would ask them their will as to whether
this or that thing should be done; and if they
answered "ya" "ya," it was done, without consulting
the aldermen or chief citizens, whose very existence
was ignored.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 59. "A similar uprising of
the middle class of citizens was taking place about this period in other
towns. They are spoken of by chroniclers of the same stamp as Fitz-Thedmar
as ribald men who proclaimed themselves 'bachelors,' and
banded themselves together to the prejudice of the chief men of the
towns (<hi rend="font-style: italic">majores urbium et burgorum</hi>)"&mdash;Chron. of Thomas Wykes
(Rolls Series No. 36), iv, 138.</p></note> It is not surprising that, under a mayor
so thoroughly in sympathy with the people, opportunity
was taken by the citizens to rectify abuses from
which they had so long suffered. Their trade had
been prejudiced by the number of foreigners which
the king had introduced into the city, and accordingly
we read of an attack made on the houses of some
French merchants. Rights of way which had been
stopped up, were again opened, and where land
had been illegally built upon, the buildings were
abated.</p>

<pb n="094" /><anchor id="Pg094" />

<p>The chronicler complains of the populace acting
"like so many justices itinerant." It was in vain that
the king addressed a letter to the mayor and citizens,
setting forth that the dissensions between himself and
the barons had been settled, and commanding his peace
to be kept as well within the city as without.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 59-60.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The movement favoured by the barons.</note>

<p>The popular movement received every encouragement
from the barons. Let those who were disaffected
put their complaints into writing, and the barons
would see that the matter was duly laid before the
king, and that the city's liberties were not diminished.
Fortified with such promises, the mayor set to work
at once to organize the craft guilds. Ordinances
were drawn up "abominations" Fitz-Thedmar calls
them<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 60.</p></note> for the amelioration of the members, and
everything was done that could be done to better
their condition.</p>

<note place="margin">The queen insulted by the citizens, 13th July, 1263.</note>

<p>A few days before Henry and the barons had
concluded a temporary peace, the citizens had been
greatly excited by an action of the king's son. Henry
was, as usual, in want of money, and had failed to raise
a loan in the city. His son came to his assistance and
seized the money and jewels lying at the Temple (29th
June). The citizens were so exasperated at this high-handed
proceeding on the part of the prince that they
vented their spleen on the queen, and pelted her with
mud and stones, calling her all kinds of opprobrious
names, as she attempted to pass in her barge under
London Bridge on her way from the Tower to
Windsor. (13th July).<note place="foot"><p>Ann. of Dunstaple (Rolls Series No. 36). iii. 222-223. Chron.
of Thos. Wykes (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid</hi>) iv, 136. Rishanger (Rolls Series No. 28, ii, 18),
places this event after the Mise of Amiens (23rd Jan., 1264).</p></note></p>

<pb n="095" /><anchor id="Pg095" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MISE OF AMIENS." />

<p>Such conduct very naturally incensed the king
and his son against the citizens. Henry was angry
with them, moreover, for having admitted the barons
contrary to his express orders.<note place="foot"><p>Annales Londonienses.&mdash;Chron. Edward I and II (Rolls Series
No. 76) i, 60.</p></note> It is not surprising,
therefore, that when Fitz-Thomas presented himself
before the Barons of the Exchequer to be admitted to
the mayoralty for the third year in succession, they
refused to admit him by the king's orders, Henry
"being for many reasons greatly moved to anger
against the city."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 62.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Mise of Amiens. 23rd Jan., 1264</note>

<p>Before the end of the year (1263), both king and
barons agreed to submit to the arbitration of the
King of France. The award known as the Mise of
Amien&mdash;from the place whence it was issue&mdash;which
Louis made on the 23rd Jan., 1264, proved of so one-sided
a character that the barons had no alternative but
to reject it. However unjustifiable such repudiation
on the part of the barons may have been from a moral
point of view, it was a matter of necessity. Many
of them, moreover, including those of the Cinque Ports,
as well as the Londoners, and nearly all the middle
class of England, had not been parties to the arbitration,
and therefore, were not pledged to accept the
award.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 64, 65.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">League between the citizens of London and the barons.</note>

<p>The citizens and the barons now entered into
solemn covenant to stand by each other "saving however
their fealty to the king." A constable and a
marshal were appointed to command the city force,
which was to stand prepared night and day to muster
at the sound of the great bell of St. Paul's. The<pb n="096" /><anchor id="Pg096" />
manor of Isleworth, belonging to Richard, King of
the Romans, the king's brother, was laid waste, and
Rochester besieged, but, disturbances again breaking
out at home, Leicester had to hurry back to restore
order and prevent the city being betrayed to the
king's son.<note place="foot"><p>Ann. of Dunstaple. iii, 230, 231.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Battle of Lewes, 14th May, 1264.</note>

<p>In May the earl set out again with a force of
Londoners<note place="foot"><p>The number of Londoners who accompanied Leicester to Lewes
is not given. Thomas Wykes mentions it to have been very large,
for the reason that the number of fools is said to be infinite!
"Quo comperto comes Leycestriæ glorians in virtute sua, congregata
baronum multitudine copiosa, Londoniensium innumerabili agmine
circumcinctus, quia legitur stultorum infinitus est numerus."&mdash;(Rolls
Series No. 36), iv, 148.</p></note> to meet the king, who was threatening
the Cinque Ports. In the early morning of the 14th
he came upon the royal army at Lewes. Prince
Edward himself led the charge against the Londoners&mdash;he
had not forgotten the insult they had recently
offered to his mother&mdash;and succeeded in driving them
off the field. They scarcely indeed awaited his onslaught,
so unpractised in warfare had they become of
recent years, but turned their backs and sped away
towards London, followed in hot pursuit by Edward.
When he returned he found that, owing to his absence,
the day was lost, and that his father and brother had
been made prisoners.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 66; Ann. of Dunstaple, iii, 232;
Thos. Wykes, iv, 149, 150; Rishanger (Rolls Series No. 28), 27.</p></note> In spite of his own success, he
also had to surrender.</p>

<note place="margin">The Mise of Lewes.</note>

<p>The barons returned to the city in triumph, bringing
the king and Richard, king of the Romans, in their
train. Edward had been placed in custody in Dover
Castle, pending negotiations. Henry was lodged in
the Bishop's Palace, whilst Richard was committed to<pb n="097" /><anchor id="Pg097" /><index index="toc" level1="SIMON DE MONTFORT'S PARLIAMENT." />
the Tower. An agreement was drawn up which
secured the safety of the king, and left all matters
of dispute to be again referred to arbitration.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 67.</p></note> This
treaty formed the basis of a new system of government,
and led to the institution of Simon de Montfort's
famous Parliament.</p>

<p>The short respite&mdash;for it proved to be no more&mdash;from
civil war was welcomed by the Londoners. The
city had been drained of a large part of its population
in order to increase the Earl of Leicester's army, and
business had been seriously disturbed. For the past
year no Court of Husting had been held, and therefore
no wills or testaments had received probate; whilst all
pleas of land, except trespass, had to stand over until
the country became more settled.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 74.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Meeting of Simon de Montfort's Parliament, 20th Jan., 1265.</note>

<p>The parliament which Leicester summoned to
meet on the 20th January, 1265, marked a new era
in parliamentary representation. It was the first
parliament in which the merchant and the trader
were invited to take their seats beside the baron and
bishop. Not only were the shires to send up two
representatives, but each borough and town were to
be similarly privileged.<note place="foot"><p>Fitz-Thedmar gives the number of representatives of each city
and borough as four: "De qualitet civitate et burgo iiii homines."&mdash;Chron.
of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 75.</p></note></p>

<p>Terms of reconciliation between king and barons
were arranged, and once more the mayor and aldermen
did fealty to Henry in person in St. Paul's church.
Fitz-Thomas, who for the fourth time was mayor, was
determined to lose nothing of his character for independence;
"My lord," said he, when taking the oath,<pb n="098" /><anchor id="Pg098" />
so long as you are willing to be to us a good king and
lord, we will be to you faithful and true."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 77. This anecdote is inserted
in the margin of Fitz-Thedmar's chronicle, the writer expressing his
horror at the "wondrous and unheard of" conduct of "this most
wretched mayor."</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Jealousy between the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester.</note>

<p>Peace was not destined to last long. Dissensions
quickly broke out between Gilbert, Earl of Gloucester,
and Simon de Montfort, owing in a great measure to
jealousy. Gloucester insisted that the Mise of Lewes
and the Provisions of Oxford had not been properly
observed, hinting unmistakably at the foreign birth
and extraction of his rival. Endeavours were made
to arrange matters by arbitration, but in vain; and by
Whitsuntide the two earls were in open hostility.
Gloucester was joined by Edward, who had succeeded
by a ruse in escaping from Hereford, where he was
detained in honourable captivity.<note place="foot"><p>The story is told by Thos. Wykes. (Rolls Series No. 36), iv, 163.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Battle of Evesham, 4th August, 1265.</note>

<p>With their combined forces they fell on Earl
Simon at Evesham and utterly defeated him (4 Aug.).
Simon himself was killed, and his body barbarously
mutilated.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. de. Ant. fo. 94b.</p></note> The king, who was in the earl's camp,
only saved himself by crying out in time "I am Henry
of Winchester, your king." Whilst the battle was
raging the city was visited with a terrible thunderstorm&mdash;an
evil omen of the future.</p>

<p>If credit be given to every statement made by
the city alderman and chronicler, Fitz-Thedmar, we
must believe that the battle of Evesham took place
just in time to prevent a wholesale massacre of the
best and foremost men of the city, including the
chronicler himself, which was being contrived by the<pb n="099" /><anchor id="Pg099" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BATTLE OF EVESHAM AND ITS RESULTS." />
mayor, the popular Thomas Fitz-Thomas, the no
less popular Thomas de Piwelesdon or Puleston, and
others.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 119. Circumstantially as the
chronicler relates the story, he appears only to have inserted it as an
after-thought. Mr. Loftie (Hist, of London, i, 151), suggests that
possibly the news of Fitz-Thomas' death might have been the occasion
of its insertion.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city taken into the king's hands from 1265 to 1270.</note>

<p>The citizens of London were soon to experience
the change that had taken place in the state of affairs.
The day after Michaelmas, the mayor and citizens
proceeded to Westminster to present the new sheriffs
to the Barons of the Exchequer; but finding no one
there, they returned home. The truth was that the
king had resorted to his favourite measure of taking
the city into his own hands for its adherence to the
late Earl of Leicester; and for five years it so
remained, being governed by a <hi rend="font-style: italic">custos</hi> or warden
appointed by the king, in the place of a mayor elected
by the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron. (Riley's Transl.), p. 235.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Threat of the king to subdue the city by force.</note>

<p>There had been some talk of the king meditating
an attack upon the city, and treating its inhabitants as
avowed enemies.<note place="foot"><p>"His lordship the king had summoned to Wyndleshores all the
earls, barons, [and] knights, as many as he could, with horses and arms,
intending to lay siege to the City of London [and] calling the citizens
his foes."&mdash;Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 81.</p></note> The very threat of such a proceeding
was sufficient to throw the city into the
utmost state of confusion. Some there were "fools
and evil-minded persons," as our chronicler describes
them&mdash;who favoured resisting force by force; but the
"most discreet men" of the city, and those who had
joined the Earl under compulsion, would have none
of it, preferring to solicit the king's favour through
the mediation of men of the religious orders. Henry<pb n="100" /><anchor id="Pg100" />
still remained unmoved, and the fear of the citizens
increased to such an extent that it was finally resolved
that the citizens as a body should make humble
submission to the king; and that the same should
be forwarded to him at Windsor under the common
seal of the city. Whilst the deputation bearing this
document was on its way it was met by Sir Roger
de Leiburn, who turned it back on the ground that he
himself was on his way to the city for the express
purpose of arranging terms of submission.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 82.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Fitz-Thomas and others summoned to Windsor.</note>

<p>That night Sir Roger lodged at the Tower, and
the next morning he went to Barking Church, on the
confines of the city,<note place="foot"><p>At one time the parish of All Hallows Barking is spoken of as
being in the County of Middlesex, at another as being within the City&mdash;Hust.
Roll. 274, (10), (12).</p></note> where he was met by the mayor
and a "countless multitude" of the citizens. The
advice he had to give the citizens was that if they
wished to be reconciled to the king, they would have
to submit their lives and property unreservedly to his
will. Letters patent were drawn up to that effect
under the common seal, and taken by Sir Roger
himself to Windsor. The citizens had not long to
wait for an answer. The king's first demand was
the removal of the posts and chains which had been
set up in the streets as a means of defence. His next
was that the mayor&mdash;his old antagonist Fitz-Thomas&mdash;and
the principal men of the city should come in
person to him at Windsor, under letters of safe conduct.
Trusting to the royal word, the mayor and about
forty of the more substantial men of the city proceeded
to Windsor, there to await a conference with
the king. To their great surprise, the whole of the<pb n="101" /><anchor id="Pg101" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FATE OF FITZ-THOMAS, MAYOR." />
party were made to pass the night in the Castle keep.
They were practically treated as prisoners.</p>

<note place="margin">The fate of Fitz-Thomas unknown.</note>

<p>Some regained their liberty, but of Fitz-Thomas
nothing more is heard. From the time that he entered
Windsor Castle, he disappears from public view. That
he was alive in May, 1266, at least in the belief of his
fellow-citizens, is shown by their cry for the release
of him and his companions "who are at Windleshores."
They would again have made him Mayor, if they
could have had their own way. "We will have no
one for mayor" (they cried) "save only Thomas
Fitz-Thomas."<note place="foot"><p>In narrating this, Fitz-Thedmar again discloses his aristocratic
proclivities by remarking, "Such base exclamations did the fools of the
vulgar classes give utterance to" on this occasion, viz., the election of
William Fitz-Richard as Sheriff of Middlesex and Warden of London.&mdash;Chron.
of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 90, 91.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city taken into the king's hand, 1265.</note>

<p>In the meantime the king had himself gone to
London and confiscated the property of more than
sixty of the citizens, driving them out of their house
and home. Hugh Fitz-Otes, the Constable of the
Tower, had been appointed warden of the city in the
place of the imprisoned mayor; bailiffs had been
substituted for sheriffs, and the citizens made to pay a
fine of 20,000 marks. Then, and only then, did the
king consent to grant their pardon.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 83, 85.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">London Bridge bestowed on the queen.</note>

<p>Queen Eleanor, who had interceded for the Londoners,<note place="foot"><p>"Regina etiam rogavit pro Londoniensibus de quibus rex plures
recepit ad pacem suam."&mdash;Ann. of Winchester (Rolls Series, No. 36),
ii, 103.</p></note>
was presented by the king with the custody
of London Bridge, the issues and profits of which
she was allowed to enjoy. She allowed the bridge,
however, to fall into such decay, that she thought she<pb n="102" /><anchor id="Pg102" />
could not do better than restore it to its rightful
owners. This she accordingly did in 1271, but soon
afterwards changed her mind, and again took the
bridge into her charge.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 146, 147.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Earl of Gloucester master of the city, April, 1267.</note>

<p>At Easter, 1267, the Earl of Gloucester, who had
constituted himself the avowed champion of those
who had suffered forfeiture, and become "disinherited"
for the part they had taken with the Earl of Leicester,
sought admission to the city. The citizens hesitated
to receive him within their gates, although according
to some, he was armed with letters patent of the
king addressed to the citizens on his behalf.<note place="foot"><p>Ann. of Dunstaple. (Rolls Series, No. 36), iii, 245.</p></note> Under
pretence of holding a conference with the papal legate
at the Church of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, he gained
admission for himself and followers: and there he
remained, having made himself master of the city's
gates.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 95.  The citizens appear
to have been divided, as indeed they often were, on the question of
admitting the Earl.</p></note> Thereupon many citizens left the city, fearing
the wrath of the king, and once more the city was in
the hands of the populace. The leading citizens were
placed under a guard; the aldermen and bailiffs were
deposed to make way for the earl's own supporters,
and, for better security, a covered way of timber was
made from the city to the Tower.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 95, 97.</p></note></p>

<p>Whatever may have been the actual part played
by the legate in admitting the disinherited into the
city, he soon showed his dissatisfaction at the state of
things within its walls, by leaving the Tower, to join
<pb n="103" /><anchor id="Pg103" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MAYORALTY RESTORED." />
the king at Ham, and placing the disinherited&mdash;"the
enemies of the king"&mdash;under an interdict.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 96.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Terms arranged between Gloucester and the king, 16th June, 1267.</note>

<p>At length the king and the Earl of Gloucester
came to terms (16 June). The earl was to have his
property restored to him, and the city was to be
forgiven all trespasses committed against the king
since the time that the earl made his sojourn within
its walls. The earl gave surety in 10,000 marks for
keeping the peace, and the citizens paid the king of
the Romans 1,000 marks for damages they had
committed three years before in his manor of
Isleworth.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 97, 100.</p></note> Not a word about the imprisoned mayor,
Fitz-Thomas!</p>

<note place="margin">Charter of Henry III, 26th March, 1268.</note>

<p>The king's letters patent granting forgiveness to
the citizens for harbouring the Earl of Gloucester<note place="foot"><p>Dated "Est Ratford," 16th June, 1267. Chron. of Mayors and
Sheriffs, pp. 98-100.</p></note>
were followed in the spring of the following year
by another charter to the city.<note place="foot"><p>Dated 26th March, 1268.  The original is preserved at the
Guildhall (Box No. 3). A copy of it, inserted in the Lib. de Ant.
(fo. 108b), has the following heading:&mdash;"Carta domini regis quam
fecit civibus Lond', <hi rend="font-style: italic">sub spe inveniendi ab eo meliorem gratiam</hi>," the
words in italics being added by a later hand.</p></note> But inasmuch as this
charter did not restore the mayoralty, the citizens
had little cause to be thankful and looked upon it as
only an instalment of favours to come.</p>

<note place="margin">The city recovers its rights to elect mayor and sheriffs, 1270.</note>

<p>Towards the end of this year or early in the next
(1269), the city was committed by the king to his
son Edward, who ruled it by deputy, Sir Hugh Fitz-Otes
being again appointed Constable of the Tower,
and warden of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 113. Ann. of Waverley (Rolls
Series No. 36), ii, 375.</p></note> It was through the good<pb n="104" /><anchor id="Pg104" />
offices of the prince, that the citizens eventually
recovered the right to elect their mayor, so long withheld.
"About the same time, that is to say,
Pentecost, 1270," writes Fitz-Thedmar, "at the
instance of Sir Edward, his lordship the king
granted unto the citizens that they might have a
mayor from among themselves in such form as they
were wont to elect him."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 129.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The sheriff's ferm increased to £400.</note>

<p>He further allowed them to choose two sheriffs
who should discharge the duties of sheriff, (<hi rend="font-style: italic">qui
tenerent vicecomitatem</hi>) of the City and Middlesex,
as formerly; but instead of the yearly ferm of
£300 in pure silver (<hi rend="font-style: italic">sterlingorum blancorum</hi>),
formerly paid for Middlesex, they were thenceforth to
pay an annual rent of £400 in money counted
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">sterlingorum computatorum</hi>.)<note place="foot"><p>Lib. de Ant., fo. 120.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Election of John Adrian, Mayor, 1270.</note>

<p>The citizens lost no time in exercising their
recovered rights. Their choice fell upon John Adrian
for the mayoralty, whilst Philip le Taillour and
Walter le Poter were elected sheriffs. After they
had been severally admitted into office&mdash;the mayor
before the king himself on Wednesday, the 16th July,
and the sheriffs at the Exchequer two days later&mdash;the
king restored the city's charters, and the citizens
acknowledged the royal favour by a gift of 100 marks
to the king, and 500 marks to Prince Edward, who
had proved so good a friend to them, and who was
about to set out for the Holy Land.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 129-130.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Election of Hervy, 1272, disputed.</note>

<p>Adrian was succeeded in the mayoralty by
Walter Hervy, who had already served as sheriff or<pb n="105" /><anchor id="Pg105" /><index index="toc" level1="WALTER HERVY RE-ELECTED MAYOR." />
bailiff on two occasions, once by royal appointment.
He made himself so popular with the "commons" of
the city during his year of office, that when October,
1272, came round and the aldermen and more
"discreet" citizens were in favour of electing Philip
le Taillour as his successor, the commons or "mob of
the city"&mdash;as the chronicler prefers to style them&mdash;cried
out, "Nay, nay, we will have no one for mayor
but Walter Hervi."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 153.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Appeal made by both parties to the king's council.</note>

<p>The aldermen finding themselves in a minority,
appealed to the king and council at Westminster.
Hervy did the same, being accompanied to Westminster
by a large number of supporters, who took
the opportunity of the aldermen laying their case
before the council to insist loudly, as they waited in
the adjacent hall, upon their own right of election
and their choice of Hervy. It was feared that the
noise might disturb the king who was confined to his
bed with what proved to be his last illness. All
parties was therefore dismissed, injunction being laid
upon Hervy not to appear again with such a following,
but to come with only ten or a dozen supporters
at the most.</p>

<note place="margin">The king's illness and death, 16th November, 1272.</note>

<p>Hervy paid no heed to this warning, but continued
to present himself at Westminster every day
for a fortnight, accompanied by his supporters in full
force, expecting an answer to be given by the council.
At length the council resolved to submit the whole
question to arbitration, the city in the meanwhile
being placed in the custody of a warden. Before the
arbitrators got to work, the king died (16 Nov.),<pb n="106" /><anchor id="Pg106" />
and rather than the city should continue to be
disturbed at such a crisis, the aldermen agreed to a
compromise, and Hervy was allowed to be mayor
for one year more.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 154, 159.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="107" /><anchor id="Pg107" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="FITZ-THEDMAR'S PREJUDICE AGAINST HERVY." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">Fitz-Thedmar's prejudice against Hervy.</note>

<p>Although the aldermen had been prevailed upon
to give their assent to Hervy's election to the
mayoralty, his democratic tendencies made him an
object of dislike, more especially to Fitz-Thomas.
When, therefore, that chronicler records that throughout
Hervy's year of office he did not allow any
pleading in the Husting for Pleas of Land except very
rarely, for the reason that the mayor himself was
defendant in a suit brought against him by Isabella
Bukerel,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 164.</p></note> we hesitate to place implicit belief in his
statement.<note place="foot"><p>The series of Husting Rolls for Pleas of Land, preserved at the
Guildhall, commence in the mayoralty of Hervy's successor.</p></note> We are inclined, moreover, to give less
credit to anything that Fitz-Thedmar may say against
the mayor when we bear in mind that the former
had a personal grievance against the latter.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 205-208.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Hervy's so-called "charter" to the guilds.</note>

<p>Hervy was a worthy successor to Fitz-Thomas,
and, under his government, the craft guilds improved
their position. Fresh ordinances for the regulation of
various crafts were drawn up, and to these the mayor,
on his own responsibility, attached the city seal.<note place="foot"><p>What Fitz-Thedmar means when he says (Chron. of Mayors and
Sheriffs, p. 171), that "only one part of the seal of the Commonalty
of London" was appended to Hervy's so-called "charter" is hard to
determine. The common seal of the city was at this period in the
custody of the mayor for the time being. Under Edward II, it was for
the first time entrusted to two aldermen and two commoners for safe
keeping.&mdash;City Records, Letter Book D, fo. 145b.  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Ordinances
of Edward II, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1319.</p></note><pb n="108" /><anchor id="Pg108" />
When Hervy's year of office expired&mdash;these so-called
"charters" were called in question as having been
unauthorised by the aldermen of the city and as
tending to favour the richer members of the guilds
to the prejudice of the poorer. After a "wordy and
most abusive dispute" carried on in the Guildhall
between the ex-mayor and Gregory de Rokesley who
acted as spokesman for the body of aldermen, Hervy
left the hall and summoned the craft-guilds to meet
him in Cheapside. There he told them that it was the
wish of Henry le Galeys (or Waleys) the mayor and
others to infringe their charters, but that if they could
stand by him he would maintain those charters in all
their integrity.</p>

<p>Fearing lest a riot might follow, the chancellor&mdash;Walter
de Merton, through whose mediation Hervy
had been at last accepted as mayor by the aldermen&mdash;ordered
his arrest. This was on the 20th December,
1273. Hervy was, accordingly, attached but
released on bail, and early in the following January
(1274), his charters were duly examined in the
Husting before all the people, and declared void.
Thenceforth, every man was to enjoy the utmost
freedom in following his calling, always provided that
his work was good and lawful.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 169-171.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Dispute between Hervy and the Mayor, 1274.</note>

<p>When the mayor removed certain butchers' and
fishmongers' stalls from Cheapside, in order that the
main thoroughfare of the city might present a creditable
appearance to the king on his return from abroad,
the owners of the stalls, who complained of being
disturbed in their freeholds&mdash;"having given to the
sheriff a great sum of money for the same"&mdash;found<pb n="109" /><anchor id="Pg109" /><index index="toc" level1="CHARGES AGAINST WALTER HERVY." />
a champion in Hervy. Their cause was pleaded at
the Guildhall, and such "a wordy strife" arose
between Hervy and the mayor, that the session had
to be broken up, and Hervy's conduct was reported to
the king's council. The next day, upon the resumption
of the session, a certain roll was produced and
publicly read, in which "the presumptuous acts and
injuries, of most notorious character" which Hervy
was alleged to have committed during his mayoralty
were set forth at length.</p>

<note place="margin">Charges against Hervy for acts done during his mayoralty.</note>

<note place="margin">Is discharged from his aldermanry.</note>

<p>The charges against him were eight in number,
of which some at least appear to be in the last degree
frivolous. He had on a certain occasion borne false
witness; he had failed on another occasion to attend
at Westminster upon a summons; he had failed to
observe all the assizes made by the aldermen and had
allowed ale to be sold in his ward for three halfpence
a gallon; he had taken bribes for allowing corn and
wine to be taken out of the city for sale, and he had
misappropriated a sum of money which had been
raised for a special purpose. Such was the general
run of the charges brought against him, in addition to
which were the charges of having permitted the
guilds to make new statutes to their own advantage
and to the loss of the city and all the realm, as
already narrated, and of having procured "certain
persons of the city, of Stebney, of Stratford, and of
Hakeneye" to make an unjust complaint against the
mayor, "who had warranty sufficient for what he had
done, namely, the council of his lordship the king."
This last charge had reference to the recent removal
of tradesmen's stalls from Chepe. No defence
appears to have been allowed Hervy. The charges<pb n="110" /><anchor id="Pg110" />
were read, and he was then and there declared to be
"judicially degraded from his aldermanry and for
ever excluded from the council of the city"; a precept
being at the same time issued for the immediate
election of a successor, to be presented at the next
court.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 173-5.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The after-results of the policy of Hervy and Fitz-Thomas.</note>

<p>From this time forward nothing more is heard
of Hervy. The same cloud envelopes his later
history, that gathered round the last years of his
predecessor and political tutor Thomas Fitz-Thomas.
The misfortune of both of these men was that they
lived before their age. Their works bore fruit long
after they had departed. The trade or craft guilds, as
distinguished from the more wealthy and influential
mercantile guilds, eventually played an important
part in the city. Under Edward II, no stranger
could obtain the freedom of the city (without which,
he could do little or nothing), unless he became a
member of one of these guilds, or sought the suffrages
of the commonalty of the city, before admission to
the freedom in the Court of Husting.<note place="foot"><p>"Et quod nullus alienigena in libertatem civitatis prædictæ
admittatur nisi in Hustengo ... et si non sint de certo mestero,
tune in libertatem civitatis ejusdem non admittentur sine assensu communitatis
civitatis illius."&mdash;Lib. Custumarum (Rolls Series), pt. 1,
pp. 269-270.</p></note></p>

<p>The normal and more expeditious way of obtaining
the freedom was thus through a guild. If Hervy
or Fitz-Thomas lived till the year 1319, when the
Ordinances just cited received the king's sanction, he
must have felt that the struggle he had made to raise
the lesser guilds had not been in vain. The mercantile
element in the city, which had formerly overcome<pb n="111" /><anchor id="Pg111" /><index index="toc" level1="THE RESULTS OF HERVY'S POLICY." />
the aristocratic element,<note place="foot"><p>"The establishment of the corporate character of the city under
a mayor marks the victory of the communal principle over the more
ancient shire organisation, which seems to have displaced early in the
century the complicated system of guild and franchise. It also marks
the triumph of the mercantile over the aristocratic element."&mdash;Stubbs,
Const. Hist., i, 630, 631.</p></note> in its turn gave way to the
numerical superiority and influence of the craft and
manufacturing element. Hence it was that in 1376&mdash;when
the number of trade or craft guilds in the
city compared with the larger mercantile guilds was
as forty to eight&mdash;the guilds succeeded in wresting for
a while from the wards the right of electing members
of the city's council.<note place="foot"><p>"The guilds continued to elect until 1384, when the right of
election was again transferred to the wards." City Records, Letter
Book H, fos. 46b, 173.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Arrival of Edward I, in London, 18th August, 1274.</note>

<p>In the meantime, King Edward I, arrived in
London (18th August, 1274), where he was heartily
welcomed by the citizens,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. (Rolls Series No. 76), i, 84. Chron.
of T. Wykes (Rolls Series No. 36) iv, p. 259.</p></note> and was crowned the
following day. He had expected to have returned
much earlier, and had addressed a letter to the mayor,
sheriffs, and commonalty of the City of London,
eighteen months before, informing them of his purposed
speedy return, and of his wishes that they
should endeavour to preserve the peace of the realm.<note place="foot"><p>Dated from "Caples in the land of Labour" (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Caples in terra
laboris</hi>) or Capua, 19th January, 1273. This letter was publicly read
in the Guildhall on the 25th March following.&mdash;Chron. of Mayors and
Sheriffs, p. 163.</p></note>
He was, however, detained in France.</p>

<note place="margin">Edward's hereditary right to the crown clearly acknowledged.</note>

<p>Edward's right to succeed his father was never
disputed. For the first time in the annals of England,
a new king commences to reign immediately after the
death of his predecessor. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Le Roi est mort, vive le</hi><pb n="112" /><anchor id="Pg112" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Roi</hi>! Within a week of his father's decease, a writ
was issued, in which the hereditary right of succession
was distinctly asserted as forming Edward's title to
the crown.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 161.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Four citizens to be sent to confer with Edward at Paris,
3rd April, 1274.</note>

<p>Before setting sail for England, Edward despatched
a letter (3rd April), "to his well-beloved, the mayor,
barons, and reputable men of London," thanking
them for the preparations he understood they were
making for the ceremony of his coronation, and bidding
them send a deputation of four of the more discreet
of the citizens, to him at Paris, for the purpose
of a special conference.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 172.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The object of the conference.</note>

<p>The difficulty which gave rise to this conference
and to the signal mark of distinction bestowed upon
the citizens of London, proved to be of a commercial
character, and, as such, one upon which the
opinions of the leading merchants of London would
be of especial value. Ever since the year 1270, the
commercial relationship between England and Flanders
had been strained. The Countess of Flanders
had thought fit to lay hands upon the wool and other
merchandise belonging to English merchants found
within her dominions, and to appropriate the same to
her own use. Edward's predecessor on the throne
had thereupon issued a writ to the mayor and sheriffs
of London, forbidding in future the export of wool to
any parts beyond sea whatsoever,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">.Id</hi>, pp. 132, 140-2.</p></note> but this measure
not having the desired effect, he shortly afterwards
had recourse to reprisals.</p>

<p>On the 28th June, 1270, a writ had been issued to
the same parties ordering them to seize the goods of<pb n="113" /><anchor id="Pg113" /><index index="toc" level1="INTERRUPTION OF TRADE WITH FLANDERS." />
all Flemings, Hainaulters, and other subjects of the
Countess, for the purpose of satisfying the claims of
English merchants; and all subjects of the Countess,
except those workmen who had received express permission
to come to England for the purpose of making
cloth, and those who had taken to themselves English
wives, and had obtained a domicile in this country, were
to quit the realm by a certain date.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 143-4.</p></note> Those Flemings
who neglected this injunction were to be seized and
kept in custody until further orders, and the same
measures were to be taken with those who harboured
them. In the meantime, an inquisition was ordered
to be made as to the amount and value of the goods
seized by the Countess, and the English merchants were
to lodge their respective claims for compensation.</p>

<note place="margin">Interruption of trade between England and Flanders.</note>

<p>The interruption of trade between England&mdash;at
that time the chief wool-exporting country in the
world&mdash;and Flanders where the cloth-working industry
especially flourished, caused much tribulation;
and the King of France, the Duke of Brabant, and
other foreign potentates, whose subjects began to feel
the effect of this commercial disturbance, addressed
letters to the King of England, requesting that their
merchants might enter his realm and stay, and traffic
there as formerly. They had never offended the King
or his people; the Countess of Flanders was the sole
offender, and she alone ought to be punished. The
matter having received due consideration, the embargo
on the export of wool was taken off with respect to
all countries, except Flanders, with the proviso that
no wool should be exported out of the kingdom without
special license from the king.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 145, 146.</p></note></p>

<pb n="114" /><anchor id="Pg114" />

<p>By the month of October, 1271, the inquisitors,
who had been appointed to appraise the goods and
chattels of Flemings in England, were able to report
to parliament that their value amounted to £8,000
"together with the king's debt," whilst the value of
merchandise belonging to English merchants and seized
by the countess amounted to £7,000, besides chattels
of other merchants. Parliament again sat in January
of the new year to consider the claims of English
merchants, when those whose goods had been taken
in Flanders, "and the Londoners more especially,"
appeared in person. Each stated the amount of his
loss and the amount of goods belonging to Flemings
which he had in hand, and a balance was struck. An
inquisition was, at the same time, taken in each of
the city wards, as to the number of merchants who
bought, sold, exchanged, or harboured the goods of
persons belonging to the dominion of the Countess;
and also as to who had taken wools out of England
to the parts beyond the sea, contrary to the king's
prohibition.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 147, 148.</p></note> Many Flemings, still lurking in the city,
were arrested, and only liberated on condition they
abjured the realm so long as the dispute between
England and Flanders should continue. Nearly six
months elapsed before any further steps were taken by
either party in the strife. The Countess then showed
signs of giving way. Envoys from her arrived in
England. She was willing to make satisfaction to all
English merchants for the losses they had sustained,
but this was to be subject to the condition that the
king should bind himself to discharge certain alleged
debts, which had been the cause of all the mischief from<pb n="115" /><anchor id="Pg115" /><index index="toc" level1="FLEMINGS EXPELLED FROM ENGLAND." />
the outset, within a fixed time. In the event of the
king failing to discharge these claims, the justice of
which he never recognised, the Countess was to be
allowed to distrain all persons coming into her country
from England by their bodies and their goods,
until satisfaction should be made for arrears. This
haughty message only made matters worse. The king
and his council became indignant, and contemptuously
dismissed the envoys, commanding them to leave
England within three days on peril of life and limb.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 149, 150.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Writ for the expulsion of all Flemings, 8th Sept., 1273.</note>

<p>Time went on; Henry died, and before his son
Edward arrived in England from the Holy Land to
take up the reins of government, his chancellor,
Walter de Merton, had caused a proclamation to be
made throughout the city, forbidding any Fleming to
enter the kingdom, under penalty of forfeiture of
person and goods. The proclamation was more than
ordinarily stringent, for it went on to say that if perchance
any individual had received special permission
from the late king to sojourn and to trade within the
realm, such permission was no longer to hold good,
but the foreigner was to pack up his merchandise,
collect his debts, and leave the country by Christmas,
1273, at the latest.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 165.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Negotiations opened with Edward at Paris for peace with
Flanders.</note>

<p>The Countess had probably hoped that a change
of monarch on the English throne would have
favoured her cause. This proclamation was sufficient
to show her the character of the king with whom she
had in future to deal, and destroyed any hope she
may have entertained in this direction. She therefore
took the opportunity of Edward's passing through
Paris to London, to open negotiations for the purpose<pb n="116" /><anchor id="Pg116" />
of restoring peace between England and Flanders;
and it was to assist the king in conducting these
negotiations, that he had summoned a deputation of
citizens of London to meet him at Paris.</p>

<note place="margin">Particulars of the four citizens sent to confer with the king at Paris.</note>

<p>The choice of the citizens fell upon Henry le
Waleys, their mayor for the time being, one who was
known almost as well in France as in the city of
London, if we may judge from the fact of his filling
the office of Mayor of Bordeaux in the following year.
With him were chosen Gregory de Rokesley who,
besides being a large dealer in wool, was also a goldsmith
and financier, and as such was shortly to be
appointed master of the exchange throughout
England;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1279. "Eodem anno escambia et novæ monetæ extiterunt
levata apud turrim Londoniensem; et Gregorius de Roqesle major
monetæ per totam Angliam."&mdash;Chron. Edw. I and II. (Rolls Series
No. 76. i. 88).&mdash;Aungier Fr. Chron. (Transl.) p. 239.</p></note> John Horn, whose name bespeaks his
Flemish origin,<note place="foot"><p>The name of John Horn with the addition. "Flemyng" occurs in
the 14th cent.&mdash;Hust. Roll. 64 (67), 81 (74).</p></note> and who may on that account have
been appointed, as one who was intimate with both
sides of the question under discussion; and Luke de
Batencurt, also of foreign extraction, who was one of
the Sheriffs of London this same year.</p>

<note place="margin">Peace concluded between England and Flanders, July, 1274.</note>

<p>These four accordingly set out to confer with the
king at Paris, having previously seen to the appointment
of wardens over the city, and of magistrates to
determine complaints which might arise at the fair to
be held at St. Botolph's, or Boston, in Lincolnshire,
during their absence.<note place="foot"><p>For one month after the Feast of St. Botolph the Abbot [17 June],
the Court of Husting in London was closed, owing to the absence of
citizens attending the fair. The right of appointing their own officers to
settle disputes arising at the fair was granted to the citizens of London at
the close of the Barons' War.&mdash;Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 176.</p></note> The deputation were absent<pb n="117" /><anchor id="Pg117" /><index index="toc" level1="ARRIVAL OF EDWARD I IN ENGLAND." />
a month. On the 19th July, Gregory de Rokesle and
certain others whose names are not mentioned again
set out in compliance with orders received from the
king; the object of their journey being, as we are
expressly told, to treat of peace between the king and
the Countess of Flanders at Montreuil.<note place="foot"><p>Peace was signed before the end of July.&mdash;Rymer's Fœdera,
(ed. 1816), vol. i. pt. 2, p. 513.</p></note> A month
later Edward himself was in England.</p>

<note place="margin">Strong Government of the city under Edward I.</note>

<p>The king ruled the city, as indeed he ruled the
rest of the kingdom, with a strong hand. Londoners
had already experienced the force of his arm and his
ability in the field, when he scattered them at Lewes;
they were now to experience the benefit of his powers
of organization in time of peace. Fitz-Thedmar's
chronicle now fails us, but we have a new source of
information in the letter books<note place="foot"><p>A series of MS. books extending from <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</hi> 1275 to 1688,
deriving their title from the letters of the alphabet with which they are
distinguished, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A, B, C,</hi> &amp;c, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">AA, BB, CC,</hi> &amp;c. We are further aided by
chronicles of the reigns of Edward I and II, edited by Bishop Stubbs
for the Master of the Rolls. A portion of these chronicles the editor
has fitly called "Annales Londonienses." There is even reason for
believing them to have been written by Andrew Horn, citizen and
fishmonger, as well as eminent jurist of his day. He died soon after
the accession of Edward III. and by his will, dated 9th Oct., 1328,
(Cal. of Wills, Court of Husting, i, 344) bequeathed to the city many
valuable legal and other treatises, only one of which (known to this
day as "Liber Horn,") is preserved among the archives of the
Corporation.</p></note> of the Corporation.</p>

<note place="margin">The necessity for an immediate supply of money.</note>

<p>The first and the most pressing difficulty which
presented itself to Edward, was the re-organization
of finance. Without money the barons could not be
kept within legitimate bounds. Having won their
cause against the usurpations of the crown, they
began to turn their arms upon each other, and it
required Edward's strong hand not only to impose
order upon his unruly nobles, but also, to bring<pb n="118" /><anchor id="Pg118" />
Scotland and Wales into submission. The country
was flooded with clipt coin. This was called in, and
new money minted at the Tower, under the supervision
of Gregory de Rokesley as Master of the
Exchange.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, p. 239.</p></note> Parliament made large grants to the
king; and he further increased his resources by imposing
knighthood upon all freeholders of estates
worth £20 a year.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Select Charters, p. 447.</p></note> When the Welsh war was
renewed in 1282, the city sent him 6,000 marks by
the hands of Waleys and Rokesley.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, (Rolls Series). Introd. vol. i, p. xxxiii.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The so-called Parliament at Shrewsbury. 1283.</note>

<p>In 1283 an extraordinary assembly&mdash;styled a
parliament by some chroniclers&mdash;was summoned to
meet at Shrewsbury to attend the trial of David,
brother of Llewelyn, Prince of Wales. To this so-called
parliament the city sent no less than six
representatives, viz.: Henry le Waleys, the mayor,
Gregory de Rokesley, Philip Cissor, or the tailor,
Ralph Crepyn, Joce le Acatour, or merchant, and
John de Gisors.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 92.</p></note> Their names are worthy of record,
inasmuch as they are the first known representatives
of the city in any assembly deserving the name of a
parliament, the names of those attending Simon de
Montfort's parliament not having been transmitted to
us. David was convicted and barbarously executed,
his head being afterwards carried to London, and set
up on the Tower, where his brother's head, with a
mock crown of ivy, had recently been placed.<note place="foot"><p>Contin. Flor. Wigorn., ii, 229. 230. Tho. Wykes (Ann. Monast.
Rolls Series No. 36), iv, 294. Ann. of Worcester (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid</hi>), iv, 486.
Walter de Heminburgh (Eng. Hist. Soc.), ii, 13.</p></note></p>

<pb n="119" /><anchor id="Pg119" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MURDER OF LAURENCE DUKET." />

<note place="margin">Ralph Crepyn and Laurence Duket.</note>

<p>Of Ralph Crepyn, one of the city's representatives
at Shrewsbury, a tragic story is told. Meeting, one
day, Laurence Duket, his rival in the affections of a
woman known as "Alice atte Bowe," the two came to
blows, and Crepyn was wounded. The affray took
place in Cheapside, and Duket, fearing he had killed
his man, sought sanctuary in Bow Church. Crepyn's
friends, hearing of the matter, followed and having
killed Duket, disposed of their victim's body in such
a way as to suggest suicide. It so happened, however,
that the sacrilegious murder had been witnessed by a
boy who informed against the culprits and no less
than sixteen persons were hanged for the part they
had taken in it. Alice, herself, was condemned to be
burnt alive as being the chief instigator of the murder;
others, including Ralph Crepyn, were sent to the
Tower, and only released on payment of heavy fines.<note place="foot"><p>They were, in the language of Stow, "hanged by the purse."
(Survey, Thoms' ed., p. 96). <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> "He was hanged by the nek and
nought by the purs." (Chaucer, Cook's Tale. l. 885). The story is recorded
in Aungier's French Chron. (Riley's translation), p. 240; and
in Chron. Edward I and II (Rolls Series i, 92-93).</p></note>
The church was placed under interdict, the doors and
windows being filled with thorns until purification
had been duly made. Duket's remains, which had
been interred as those of a suicide, were afterwards
taken up and received the rights of Christian burial in
Bow Churchyard.</p>

<note place="margin">Legislative enactments of 1285.</note>

<p>The year 1285 was a memorable one both for
London and the kingdom. It witnessed the passing
of two important statutes. In the first place the
statute <hi rend="font-style: italic">De Donis</hi> legalised the principle of tying up
real estate, so as to descend, in an exclusive perpetual
line; in other words, it sanctioned entails, and its<pb n="120" /><anchor id="Pg120" />
effect is still experienced at the present day in every
ordinary settlement of land. In the next place the
Assise of Arms of Henry II was improved so as to
secure for the king a national support in the time of
danger. In every hundred and franchise each man's
armour was to be viewed twice a year; and defaults
reported to the king "who would find a remedy."
The gates of walled towns were to be closed from
sun-set to sun-rise, and watch and ward were to be
kept as strictly as in times past, "that is to wit, from
the day of the Ascension until the day of S. Michael,
in every city by six men at every gate; in every
borough, twelve men; every town, six or four,
according to the number of the inhabitants of the
town, and they shall watch the town continually all
night from the sun-setting unto the sun-rising."<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Select Charters, pp. 472-474.</p></note>
Three years previous to the passing of this statute the
mayor, alderman and chamberlain had made very
similar provisions for the keeping of the City of
London, the city's gates, and the river Thames.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 52. Riley's Memorials, p. 21.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The justiciars at the Tower, 1285</note>

<p>For the city, the year was a memorable one,
owing to the suspension of its franchise. The
circumstances which caused the loss of its liberties
for a period of thirteen years (1285-1298) were these.
The king's justiciars were sitting at the Tower, where
the mayor, sheriffs, and aldermen of the city had
been summoned to attend. Owing to some informality
in the summons, Gregory de Rokesley, the
Mayor, declined to attend in his official capacity, but
formally "deposed himself" at the Church of All
Hallows Barking&mdash;the limit of the city jurisdiction&mdash;<pb n="121" /><anchor id="Pg121" /><index index="toc" level1="THE ITER AT THE TOWER." />
by handing the city's seal to Stephen Aswy or Eswy,
a brother alderman. On entering the chamber where
sat the justiciars, the mayor excused his unofficial
appearance on the ground of insufficient notice. This
was not what the justiciars had been accustomed to.
On the contrary, the citizens had usually shown studied
respect towards the justiciars whenever they came to
the Tower for the purpose of holding pleas of the
crown.</p>

<note place="margin">The customary procedure when the citizens waited on the justices at the Tower.</note>

<p>The rules of procedure on such occasions are
fully set out in the city's "Liber Albus,"<note place="foot"><p>Rolls Series, i, 51-60. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Lib. Ordinationum, fos. 154b, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi></p></note> and they
contain, curiously enough, a provision expressly made
for cases where the full notice of forty days had not
been given. In such an event the prescribed rule was
to send some of their more discreet citizens to the
king and his council to ask for the appointment of
another day. Whether Rokesley had taken this step
before resorting to the measures he did we are not
told. It was also the custom on such occasions for
the citizens to gather at Barking Church, clothed in
their best apparel, and thence proceed in a body to
the Tower. A deputation was appointed&mdash;selected
members of the common council&mdash;who should also
proceed to the Tower for the purpose of giving an
official welcome to the justiciars on behalf of the
citizens. It was not thought to be in any way derogatory
to secure the goodwill of the king's justiciars
by making ample presents. It had been done time
out of mind. The sheriffs and aldermen were to
attend with their respective sergeants and beadles,
the benches at the Tower were to be examined
beforehand and necessary repairs carried out, all shops<pb n="122" /><anchor id="Pg122" />
were to be closed and no business transacted during
the session. In a word, everything was to be done
that could add to the dignity of the justiciars and
the solemnity of the occasion. In contrast with all
this, Rokesley's conduct was indeed strange, and leads
us to suppose that his action was caused by some
other and stronger reason than the mere omission
to give the usual notice of the coming of the king's
justiciars.</p>

<note place="margin">The city declared to be taken into the king's hand.</note>

<p>Be this as it may, the king's treasurer, who may
possibly have been forewarned of what was about to
take place, at once decided what course to take. He
declared the city to be there and then taken into the
king's hands, on the pretext that it was found to be
without a mayor, and he summoned the citizens to
appear on the morrow before the king at Westminster.
When the morrow came, the citizens duly appeared,
and about eighty of them were detained. Those who
accompanied Rokesley to Barking Church on the
previous day were confined in the Tower, but after a
few days they were all set at liberty, with the exception
of Stephen Aswy, who was removed in custody
to Windsor.<note place="foot"><p>The circumstances of Rokesley's visit to the justices at the Tower
are set out in the city's "Liber Albus" (i, 16), from a MS. of Andrew
Horn, no longer preserved at the Guildhall. The story also appears
in Chron. Edward I and II (Rolls Series No. 76), i, 94.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">For thirteen years the city governed by a <hi rend="font-style: italic">custos</hi> instead of a mayor.</note>

<p>The king appointed Ralph de Sandwich <hi rend="font-style: italic">custos</hi> or
warden of the city, enjoining him at the same time
to observe the liberties and customs of the citizens,
and for the next thirteen years (1285-1298) the city
continued to be governed by a warden in the person
of Sandwich or of John le Breton, whilst the sheriffs<pb n="123" /><anchor id="Pg123" /><index index="toc" level1="THE EXPULSION OF THE JEWS." />
were sometimes appointed by the Exchequer and
sometimes chosen by the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>In 1293 the king appointed Elias Russell and Henry le Bole his
"improvers" (<hi rend="font-style: italic">appropriatores</hi>) in the city:&mdash;Chron. Edward I and II,
(Rolls Series No. 76, i, 102). Their duties were practically identical
with those of sheriffs, and Bishop Stubbs places a marginal note over
against the appointment,&mdash;"Sheriffs appointed by the king." Walter
Hervy is recorded as having removed certain stones near Bucklersbury
when he was "improver" of the city (Letter Book A, fo. 84.
Riley's Memorials, p. 25). This was probably done in 1268, when the
city was in the king's hand, and Hervy and William de Durham were
appointed bailiffs "without election by the citizens."&mdash;Chron. Mayors
and Sheriffs, pp. 112, 113.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Both the king and the city in straits for money, 1289-1290.</note>

<p>In May, 1286, the king went to Gascony, leaving
the country in charge of his nephew, Edmund, Earl
of Cornwall, and did not return until August, 1289.
He was then in sore straits for money, as was so
often the case with him, and was glad of a present of
£1,000 which the citizens offered by way of courtesy
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">curialitas</hi>). The money was ordered (14th October)
to be levied by poll,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book A, fo. 132b.</p></note> but many of the inhabitants
were so poor that they could only find pledges for
future payment, and these pledges were afterwards
sold for what they would fetch.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 110.</p></note> A twelve-month
later (October, 1290) when Edward visited London,
he was fain to be content with the smaller sum of
1,000 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 98.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's difficulties increased by the expulsion of the Jews, 1290.</note>

<p>The expulsion of the Jews in 1290 increased
Edward's difficulties, for on them he chiefly depended
for replenishing his empty exchequer. Their expulsion
was not so much his own wish as the wish of his
subjects, who, being largely in debt to the Jews,
regarded them as cruel tyrants. The nation soon
discovered that it had made a mistake in thus getting
rid of its creditors, for in the absence of the Jews,<pb n="124" /><anchor id="Pg124" />
Edward was compelled to resort to the Lombard
merchants. It may possibly have been owing to
some monetary transactions between them that the
king was solicitous of getting a life interest in the
city's Small Beam made over to a lady known as
Jacobina la Lumbard. No particulars are known
of this lady, but to judge from her name she probably
came of a family of money-lenders, and if so, the
king's action in writing from Berwick (28th June,
1291) to the warden and aldermen of the city&mdash;at a
time when he was completely in the hands of the
Italian goldsmiths and money-lenders&mdash;soliciting for
her a more or less lucrative post is easily intelligible.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book A, fo. 95. Riley's Memorials, p. 26.</p></note>
The king's request was refused, notwithstanding the
city being at the time in charge of a <hi rend="font-style: italic">custos</hi> of his own
choice instead of a mayor elected by the citizens
themselves. Such requests produced friction between
the king and the city, and the former's financial
relations with the foreign merchants were fraught
with danger to himself and to his son.<note place="foot"><p>"From the very day of his accession, Edward was financially in
the hands of the Lombard bankers; hence arose, no doubt, the
difficulty which he had in managing the City of London; hence came
also the financial mischief which followed the banishment of the Jews;
and hence an accumulation of popular discontent, which showed itself
in the king's lifetime by opposition to his mercantile policy, and, after
his death, supplied one of the most efficient means for the overthrow
of his son."&mdash;Chron. Edward I and II. Introd. vol. i, pp. c, ci.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward's domestic troubles of 1290.</note>

<p>Edward's anxiety was in the meanwhile increased
by domestic troubles. In 1290 he suffered a bitter
disappointment by the death of a Scottish princess
who was affianced to his son, the Prince of Wales,
and thus a much-cherished plan for establishing
friendly relations between the two countries was
frustrated.  But this disappointment was quickly<pb n="125" /><anchor id="Pg125" /><index index="toc" level1="DEATH OF QUEEN ELEANOR." />
cast in the shade by the more severe affliction he
suffered in the loss of his wife. In November Queen
Eleanor died. Her corpse was brought from Lincoln
to Westminster, and the bereaved husband ordered a
memorial cross to be set up at each place where
her body rested. One of these crosses was erected
at the west end of Cheapside. After the Reformation
the images with which the cross was ornamented,
like the image of Becket set over the gate
of the Mercers' Chapel, roused the anger of the
iconoclast, who took delight in defacing them.</p>

<note place="margin">Seizure of treasure in monastries and churches, 1294.</note>

<p>Time only increased the king's pecuniary difficulties.
In February, 1292, all freeholders of land of
the annual value of £40 were ordered to receive
knighthood, and in the following January the estates
of defaulters were seized by the king's orders.<note place="foot"><p>Writ to the Sheriff of Middlesex, dated 2nd Jan., 1293. Letter
Book B, fo. 25. Contin. Flor. Wigorn., ii, 266.</p></note> In
June, 1294, war was declared against France. Money
must be had. Every monastery and every church
throughout England was ransacked for treasure, and
the sum of £2,000, found in St. Paul's Church, was
appropriated for the public service.<note place="foot"><p>Ann. of Dunstaple (Rolls Series No. 36), iii, 390. The chronicler
acquits the king of complicity in this sacrilege.</p></note> The dean was
seized with a fit (<hi rend="font-style: italic">subita percussus passione</hi>) and died
in the king's presence.<note place="foot"><p>Contin. Flor. Wigorn., ii, 274.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city furnishes ships and men for the defence of the coast 1295, 1296.</note>

<p>Instead of invading France, Edward found his
own shores devastated by a French fleet, whilst at
the same time his hands were full with fresh difficulties
from Scotland and Wales. In the summer of
1295, the city furnished the king with three ships,
the cost being defrayed by a tax of twopence in<pb n="126" /><anchor id="Pg126" />
the pound charged on chattels and merchandise.
John le Breton, then warden, advanced the sum of
£40, which the aldermen and six men of each ward
undertook to repay.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C. fo. 20.</p></note> In the following year (1296)
the city agreed, after some little hesitation, to furnish
forty men with caparisoned horses, and fifty arbalesters
for the defence of the south coast, under
the king's son, Edward of Carnarvon.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 21b, 22. (Riley's Memorials, pp. 31-33). Liber Custum.,
i, 72-76.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The subjection of Scotland, 1296.</note>

<p>Edward again turned his attention to Scotland,
and, having succeeded in reducing Balliol to submission,
he carried off from Scone the stone which
legend identifies with Jacob's pillow, and on which
the Scottish kings had from time immemorial been
crowned,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Walter de Hemingburgh (Eng. Hist. Soc.), ii. 108, 109.</p></note> By Edward's order the stone was enclosed
in a stately seat, and placed in Westminster Abbey,
where it has since served as the coronation chair of
English sovereigns.</p>

<note place="margin">The parliament of Bury St. Edmund's, 3rd Nov., 1296.</note>

<p>From Berwick Edward issued (26 Aug., 1296,)
writs for a Parliament to meet at Bury St. Edmund's,
in the following November. The constitution of
this Parliament was the same as that which had
met at Westminster in November of the previous
year (1295) and which was intended to serve as a
model parliament, a pattern for all future national
assemblies. The city was represented by two aldermen,
namely, Sir Stephen Aswy, or Eswy, who had
been confined in Windsor Castle ten years before for
his conduct towards the king's justiciars at the Tower,
and Sir William de Hereford.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 22b.</p></note> From this time forward<pb n="127" /><anchor id="Pg127" /><index index="toc" level1="THE KING IN DIFFICULTIES." />
down to the present day we have little difficulty in
discovering from one source or another the names of
the city's representatives in successive parliaments.
Edward, of course, wanted money. The barons and
knights increased their former grants; so also did the
burgesses. The clergy, on the other hand, declared
themselves unable to make any grant at all in the
face of a papal prohibition,<note place="foot"><p>By the bull <hi rend="font-style: italic">Clericis Laicos</hi>, Boniface VIII had recently forbidden
the clergy to pay taxes to any layman.&mdash;Chron. of Walter de Hemingburgh
(Eng. Hist. Soc.), ii, 113-116.</p></note> and the king was at last
driven to seize the lay fees of the clergy of the
province of Canterbury. In the spring of the following
year he proceeded to seize all the wool of the
country, paying for it by tallies, and to levy a supply
of provisions on the counties. The act was only
justifiable on the plea of necessity, and led to
measures being taken to prevent its repetition.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., ii, 130, 131, 134.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward's altercation with Roger Bigod, Feb., 1297.</note>

<p>It was an easier matter for Edward to raise
money than to get the barons to accompany him
abroad. To leave them behind was to risk the peace
of the country. He therefore spared no efforts to
persuade them to join in a projected expedition, and
when persuasion failed tried threats. It was his
desire that the barons should go to Gascony, whilst
he took the command in Flanders. This was not at
all to the taste of the barons, who declined to go
abroad, except in the personal retinue of the king
himself. "With you, O king," said Roger Bigod, "I
will gladly go; as belongs to me by hereditary right,
I will go in front of the host, before your face;" but
without the king he positively declined to move.
"By God, earl," cried the king, fairly roused by the<pb n="128" /><anchor id="Pg128" />
obstinacy of his vassal, "you shall either go or
hang;" to which the earl replied, with equal determination,
"By the same token, O king, I will neither
go nor hang."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Walter de Hemingburgh, ii, 121.</p></note></p>

<p>Nothing daunted, the king issued writs (15 May)
for a military levy of the whole kingdom for service
abroad, to meet at London on the 7th July, a
measure as unconstitutional as the seizure of wool
and the levying of taxes without the assent of
Parliament. On the day appointed, the barons, who
had received a large accession of strength from the
great vassals, appeared with their forces at St. Paul's;
but instead of complying with the king's demands&mdash;or
rather requests, for the king had altered his tone&mdash;they
prepared a list of their grievances.</p>

<note place="margin">The "Confirmatio Cartarum," Oct. 1297.</note>

<p>With difficulty civil war was avoided, and in
August Edward set sail for Flanders. No sooner was
his back turned, than the barons and the Londoners
made common cause in insisting upon a confirmation
and amplification of their charters.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 126, 127.</p></note> Prince Edward,
the king's son, who had been appointed regent in his
father's absence, granted all that was asked, and on
the 10th October (1297), the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Confirmatio Cartarum</hi>,
as it was called, was issued in the king's name.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 149, 151.</p></note>
Thenceforth, no customs duties were to be exacted
without the consent of parliament.</p>

<note place="margin">The mayoralty restored to the city, 11th April, 1298.</note>

<p>In view of the king's return to England in March
(1298), the warden of the city, Sir John Breton, the
aldermen, and a deputation from the wards met
together and resolved that every inhabitant of the<pb n="129" /><anchor id="Pg129" /><index index="toc" level1="RISING OF THE SCOTS UNDER WALLACE." />
city, citizen and stranger, should pay to the king's
collectors the sum of sixpence in the pound of all
their goods up to £100.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book B, fo. xxxvii (101b).</p></note> In the following month
Edward issued letters patent (11th April), restoring
to the citizens their franchises and the right of again
electing their mayor.<note place="foot"><p>Preserved among the City Archives (Box 26). <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Letter Book
C, fo. xxiv, b.</p></note> The choice of the citizens fell
upon Henry le Waleys, who was duly admitted by the
Barons of the Exchequer after presentation to the
king.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book B, fo. 93.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Suppression of the Scottish rising under Wallace, 1298, 1304.</note>

<p>In the summer Edward marched to Scotland for
the purpose of putting down the rising under Wallace.
An account of the battle of Falkirk, fought on the
22nd July, was conveyed to the mayor, aldermen,
and "barons" of London, by letter from Walter
Langton, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, or, as he
was then styled, Bishop of Chester, who wrote as an
eye-witness, if not indeed as a partaker in that day's
work.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 24. (Riley's Memorials, 37).</p></note> It was the first battle of any consequence in
which the English long-bow was brought into prominence.
Edward's victory was complete. The enemy's
loss was great, the number that perished, according to
the bishop's information, being two hundred men-at-arms
and twenty thousand foot soldiers. Edward
was unable, however, to follow up his success for
want of supplies, and so retreated. In 1304, he again
marched northward, notwithstanding the defection of
many nobles. He had previously resorted once more
to the questionable practice of talliaging the city of<pb n="130" /><anchor id="Pg130" />
London,<note place="foot"><p>Strictly speaking, a talliage could only be charged on the king's
demesnes, and these did not include the City of London.</p></note> levying from the citizens the fifteenth penny
of their moveable goods and the tenth penny of their
rents.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II (Rolls Series), i, 132.</p></note> The campaign was eminently successful.
Sterling surrendered after a siege of two months, and
Wallace himself shortly afterwards fell into his hands,
having refused the terms of an amnesty which Edward
had generously offered.</p>

<note place="margin">Wallace brought to London, 22 Aug., 1305.</note>

<p>He was carried to London, where a crowd of men
and women flocked out to meet one, of whose gigantic
stature and feats of strength they had heard so much.
He was lodged in the house of William de Leyre, an
alderman of the city, situate in the parish of All
Hallows at the Hay or All Hallows the Great.
Having been tried at Westminster and condemned to
death on charges of treason, sacrilege and robbery,
he was hanged, drawn, and quartered, and his head
set up on London Bridge.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron. (Riley's Transl.), 247. Chron. Edward I
and II (Rolls Series), i, 139.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Knighthood conferred on John le Blound, the mayor, and others, May 1306.</note>

<p>No sooner was Wallace disposed of than another
claimant to the Scottish crown appeared in the person
of Bruce. Before Edward took the field against the
new foe, he conferred knighthood upon his son and
nearly three hundred others, including John le Blound
the mayor. The number of knights within the small
compass of the city was reckoned at that time to be
not less than a thousand.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II (Rolls Series), i, 146. Hemingburgh
ii, 248.</p></note> Knighthood, as we have
seen, was one of the means Edward resorted to for
raising money, and on this occasion the citizens of<pb n="131" /><anchor id="Pg131" /><index index="toc" level1="DEATH OF EDWARD I." />
London are said to have made him a free gift of
£2,000, in recognition of the honour bestowed on
their mayor.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron. (Riley's Transl.), 247 n.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Death of the king, 7th July, 1307.</note>

<p>In the summer of 1307, Edward set out to
execute the vow of vengeance against Bruce that he
had made on the occasion of the knighthood of his
son, but the hand of death was upon him, and before
lie reached the Scottish border he died (7th July).</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="132" /><anchor id="Pg132" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VI.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">The accession of Edward II.</note>

<p>The new king's character, differing as it did so
much from that of his father, was not one to commend
itself to the citizens of London. With them he never
became a favourite. The bold and determined character
of Queen Isabel, the very antipodes of her
husband, was more to their liking, and throughout
the contests that ensued between them, the citizens
steadily supported her cause. At her first appearance,
as a bride, in the city, the streets were compared with
the New Jerusalem, so rich were they in appearance;<note place="foot"><p>"Tunc visa est Londonia quasi nova Jerusalem monilibus ornata."&mdash;Chron.
Edward I and II (Rolls Series No. 76), i, 152.</p></note>
whilst at the coronation ceremony, which took place
a month later (25th February, 1308), she and her
husband were escorted by the mayor and aldermen
in their most gorgeous robes, quartered with the arms
of England and France, and were served at the banquet
as custom commanded.<note place="foot"><p>"Ad quam coronationem major, aldermanni et cives Londoniarum
induti samiteis et sericeis vestimentis et ex armis Angliæ et Franciæ
depictis, coram rege et regina Karolantes, et servi civium ad illud festum,
ut moris est, de cupa servientes, omnibus intuentibus inauditum proviserunt
gaudium."&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id. ibid.</hi></p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's foreign favourites.</note>

<p>But even thus early in Edward of Carnarvon's
reign the presence of foreigners&mdash;to whom the king
was even more addicted than his father&mdash;was likely
to prove a source of trouble; and it was necessary to
make special proclamations forbidding the carrying of<pb n="133" /><anchor id="Pg133" /><index index="toc" level1="THE ORDAINERS AND THEIR WORK." />
arms on the day of the coronation and enjoining
respect for foreigners attending the ceremony.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 93 (Riley's Memorials, p. 64).</p></note> The
king's foreign favourites proved his ruin, and contributed
in no small degree to the eventual defection of
the city. They were for ever desiring some favour of
the citizens. At one time it was Piers de Gavestone
who wanted a post for his "valet";<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book D, fo. 96 (Memorials, pp. 69-71).</p></note> at another it
was Hugh le Despenser who desired (and obtained) a
lease of the Small Beam for a friend.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 97 b (Memorials, p. 69).</p></note> The friend
only held the Beam for little more than six months,
and then, at the urgent request of the queen herself,
it was given to another.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book D, fo. 104 (Memorials, pp. 72-74).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Ordainers and their work, 1308-1311.</note>

<p>The barons were especially irritated at being
supplanted by the king's favourites, and in 1308
succeeded in getting Edward to send Gaveston out
of England. In the following year, however, he was
recalled, and the barons became so exasperated that
in 1310, when the king summoned an assembly of
bishops and barons, the latter appeared, contrary to
orders, in full military array. The king could not do
otherwise than submit to their dictation. Ordainers
were appointed from among the barons for the purpose
of drawing up ordinances for the government of
the kingdom. These ordinances were promulgated
in their complete form in 1311, when they received
the sanction of a parliament assembled at the House
of the Black Friars, in the month of August, and were
afterwards publicly proclaimed in St. Paul's Churchyard,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Mayors and Sheriffs, pp. 224-225.</p></note>
special precautions being taken at the time to<pb n="134" /><anchor id="Pg134" />
safeguard the gates of the city by night and
day.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book D, fo. 147b.</p></note> Gaveston was condemned to banishment for
life.</p>

<note place="margin">The City's gift of 1,000 marks to assist the king against Scotland, March, 1311.</note>

<p>In the meantime, whilst the Ordainers were engaged
on their work, Edward had put himself at the
head of his army and marched against the Scots, who
were rapidly gaining ground under Bruce. He remained
on the border until July, 1311, trying every
means to raise money. In March of that year the
city sent him one thousand marks, by the hands of
Roger le Palmere and William de Flete, the mayor,
Richer de Refham, contributing no less than one
hundred pounds of the whole sum. The money was
despatched on horseback, tied up in baskets covered
with matting and bound with cords, and the cost of
every particular is set out in the city's records.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 125b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richer de Refham, Mayor, 1310-1311.</note>

<p>Refham was a mayor of the popular type. He
had already suffered deprivation of his aldermanry for
some reason or another, but was reinstated in 13O2.<note place="foot"><p>"Eodem anno (<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> 1302), die Lunæ iv<hi rend="vertical-align: super">to</hi> Kalendas Februarii,
restitutus est Richerus de Refham in honore aldermanniæ Londoniarum,
et factus est aldermannus de Warda de Basseishawe."&mdash;Chron. Edward
I and II, i, 104.</p></note>
No sooner was he chosen mayor than he caused a
collection to be made of the ancient liberties and
customs of the city, from the books and rolls preserved
in the city's Chamber, and having assembled
the aldermen and best men of the city, he caused
them to be publicly read. This having been done,
he next proceeded to ask the assembly if it was their
will that these ancient customs and liberties, which
had so often been infringed by the removal of mayors<pb n="135" /><anchor id="Pg135" /><index index="toc" level1="RICHER DE REFHAM, MAYOR." />
and sheriffs, should be for the future maintained. Their
answer being given unanimously in the affirmative,
he at once took steps to obtain the king's writ of
confirmation, and caused them to be proclaimed
throughout the city. He made a perambulation of
the city and abated all nuisances and encroachments.
He went further than this. For some time past the
streets had been rendered unsafe to pass after dark
by bands of rioters who at that day were known by
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">sobriquet</hi> of "roreres." A few years later, the
same class went under the name of "riffleres." They
were the precursors of the "Muns," the "Tityre Tus,"
the "Hectors," and the "Scourers,"&mdash;dynasties of
tyrants, as Macaulay styles them, which domineered
over the streets of London, soon after the Restoration,
and at a later period were superseded by the "Nickers,"
the "Hawcubites," and the still more dreaded "Mohawks,"
of Queen Anne's reign. By whatever name
they happened at the time to be known, their practice
was the same, viz.:&mdash;assault and robbery of peaceful
citizens whose business or pleasure carried them
abroad after sundown.</p>

<p>During Refham's mayoralty, a raid was made on
all common nightwalkers, "bruisers" (<hi rend="font-style: italic">pugnatores</hi>),
common "roreres," <hi rend="font-style: italic">wagabunds</hi> and others, and many
were committed to prison, to the great relief of the
more peaceably disposed.<note place="foot"><p>Among those who were called to account was a woman remarkable
for her name&mdash;"Sarra la Bredmongesterre." A selection of the cases
enquired into is printed in Riley's Memorials, pp. 86-89.</p></note></p>

<p>His strictness and impartiality were such as to
raise up enemies, and an excuse was found for removing
him not only from the office of mayor, but<pb n="136" /><anchor id="Pg136" />
once again from his aldermanry.<note place="foot"><p>"Sed quia idem Richerus fuerat austerus et celer ad justitiam
faciendam nulli parcendo, et quia fecit imprisonare Willelmum de
Hakford, mercer, ideo dictus W, et sui complices insurrexerunt in ipsum
et ideo depositus fuit ab officio majoris et postea aldermanniæ suæ."&mdash;Chron.
Edw. I and II, i, 175-176.</p></note> On this point,
however, the city archives are altogether silent, they
only record the appointment of his successor to the
mayoralty chair at the usual time and in the usual
manner.</p>

<note place="margin">The fall of Gaveston.</note>

<p>In January, 1312, the king returned to the north,
and as soon as he had arrived at York ignored the
ordinance touching Gaveston, and instead of sending
his favourite into exile, received him into favour and
restored his forfeited estates. Foreseeing the storm
that he would have to meet from the barons, the king
wrote from Knaresborough (9th Jan.) to Refham's
successor, John de Gisors, enjoining him to put the
city into a state of defence, and not allow armed men
to enter on any pretext whatever.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book D, fo. 142.</p></note> On the 21st he
wrote again, not only to the mayor, but to nineteen
leading men of the city, exhorting them to hold the
city for him.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 142b-143b (Memorials pp.
93-98.)</p></note> Other letters followed in quick succession&mdash;on
the 24th and 31st January and the 8th
February&mdash;all couched in similar terms.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 142b, 143b, 145b.</p></note> When,
however, he saw how hopeless his case was, Edward
sent word to the mayor and sheriffs that the barons
might be admitted provided the city was still held for
the king. Accordingly the barons were admitted
without bloodshed, and held consultation at St. Paul's
as to what was best to be done.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. i, 203.</p></note> Gaveston's days
were numbered. On the 12th June he was forced to<pb n="137" /><anchor id="Pg137" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FALL OF GAVESTON." />
surrender unconditionally to the Earl of Warwick,
and that day week was beheaded without the semblance
of a trial.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. de Antiq., fo. 43b. Aungier's Fr. Chron. (Riley's Transl.),
p. 250.</p></note></p>

<p>The influence he had exercised over the king had
been remarkable from their youth. The son of a
Gascon knight, he had been brought up with Edward
as his foster brother and playfellow, and in course of
time the strong will of the favourite gained a complete
mastery over the weaker will of the prince. But his
arrogant behaviour soon raised such a storm among
the nobles at Court that he was forced to leave
England. When Edward succeeded to the throne, one
of his first acts was to recall Gaveston, to whom he
gave his own niece in marriage, after having bestowed
upon him the Earldom of Cornwall. The king seemed
never tired of heaping wealth upon his friend. Among
other things, he bestowed upon his favourite (28th
Aug., 1309) the sum of 100 shillings payable out of
the rent of £50 due from the citizens of London for
Oueenhithe, to be held by him, his wife, and the heirs
of their bodies.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 45.</p></note></p>

<p>Both of them had friends and enemies in
common. As Prince of Wales, Edward had made
an attempt to encroach upon some woods belonging
to Walter Langton, Bishop of Chester. This caused
a breach between father and son, and the prince
was banished from Court for a whole half-year.
Gaveston also bore the same bishop a grudge, for
it was owing in a great measure to Langton's influence
as treasurer to Edward I that he was in the first
instance forced into exile. When the prince succeeded<pb n="138" /><anchor id="Pg138" />
his father, there came a day of retribution for the
bishop; his property was handed over to Gaveston,
and he himself carried prisoner from castle to castle
by the now all powerful favourite. A proclamation
was also issued at the instance of Gaveston, inviting
complaints against the bishop.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book C, fo. 92b (Memorials p. 63).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Parliament at London. August, 1312.</note>

<p>Edward had purposed holding a parliament at
Lincoln towards the end of July, 1312, but the turn
that affairs had taken induced him to change his mind,
and he summoned it to meet at Westminster.<note place="foot"><p>The city chose as its representatives, Nicholas de Farendone, John
de Wengrave, and Robert de Kelleseye. Letter Book D. fos. 149b,
151, 151b.</p></note> It was
important that he should secure the city, if possible,
in his favour. In this he was successful; so that
when the barons appeared to threaten London, having
arrived with a large force at Ware, they found the
city's gates strongly guarded.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 151b, 152 (Memorials pp. 102-104.)</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The birth of a prince, 13 Nov., 1312.</note>

<p>In November (1312), the queen gave birth to a
son, who afterwards ascended the throne as Edward III.
Isabel herself informed the citizens of the auspicious
event by letter sent by the hands of John de Falaise,
her "taillur."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 168 (Memorials, pp. 105-106).</p></note> The news had already reached the
city, however, before the queen's own messenger
arrived, and he signified his disappointment at being
forestalled by declining to accept a sum of £10 and a
silver cup of 32 ozs., which the city offered him by
way of gratuity, as being inadequate to his deserts.
As nothing further is recorded of the matter, it is
probable that the offended tailor had reason to repent
of his folly. For more than a week the city was
given up to merry-making, in honour of the birth of<pb n="139" /><anchor id="Pg139" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITIZENS RESIST A TALLIAGE." />
an heir to the crown. The conduits ran with wine;
a solemn mass was sung at St. Paul's, and the mayor
and aldermen rode in state to Westminster, accompanied
by members of the fraternities of drapers,
mercers, and vintners of London, in their respective
liveries, to make offering, returning to dine at the
Guildhall, which was hung with tapestry as befitted
the occasion.</p>

<note place="margin">The question of the king's rights to talliage the city, 1312-1314.</note>

<p>After the death of Gaveston, his old enemy
Walter Langton again found favour and resumed his
office as treasurer. The city had little reason to be
gratified at his return to power; for it was by his
advice that the king in December of this year (1312),
issued orders for a talliage, which the great towns,
and especially London, objected to pay. Early in the
following January (1313), the mayor and aldermen
were summoned to attend the royal council, sitting at
the house of the White Friars. The question was
there put to them&mdash;would they make fine for the
talliage, or be assessed by poll on their rents and
chattels? Before making answer, the mayor and
aldermen desired to consult the commons of the city.
An adjournment accordingly took place for that
purpose. When next the mayor and aldermen
appeared before the council, they resisted the talliage
on the following grounds:<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book D, fos. 164, 164b.</p></note>&mdash;In the first place, because,
although the king might talliage cities and boroughs
that were of his demesne, he could not, as they
understood, talliage the City of London, which
enjoyed exemption from such an imposition by
charter. In the next place, there were prelates and
barons, besides citizens, who enjoyed rents and<pb n="140" /><anchor id="Pg140" />
tenements in the city, and their consent would first
have to be obtained before the municipal authorities
could levy such a tax. Thirdly, the citizens held the
city by grant of former kings, at a fee ferm for all
services payable into the exchequer, and on that
account ought not to be talliaged. Under these circumstances
the council was asked to delay the talliage
until Parliament should meet.</p>

<p>This request the king and council expressed
themselves as ready to comply with on condition that
the city made an immediate advance of 2,000 marks.
The city refused, and the king's assessors appeared at
the Guildhall, and read their commission. They were
on the point of commencing work, when the city
obtained a respite until the meeting of Parliament
by a loan of £1,000. More than eighteen months
elapsed, and at last a Parliament was summoned to
meet at York (Sept. 1314); but the country was
in such a disturbed state, owing to the renewal of
the war with Scotland, that the talliage question was
not discussed. Nevertheless the king's officers
appeared again in the city to make an assessment,
and again they were bought off by another loan of
£400. The king took the money and broke his word,
and the record of pledges taken from citizens for
"arrears of divers talliages and not redeemed," is
significant of the hardship inflicted by this illegal
exaction on a large number of inhabitants of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book E, fo. 18. (Memorials, pp. 108-110).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The renewal of the war with Scotland, 1314.</note>

<p>Out of this sum of £400, nearly one-half (£178
3<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>), was allowed the city for the purpose of
furnishing the king with a contingent of 120<pb n="141" /><anchor id="Pg141" /><index index="toc" level1="DISSENSION IN THE CITY." />
arbalesters, fully equipped for the defence of Berwick.
Edward had been defeated by the Scots at Bannockburn
(24 June, 1314), and Berwick was threatened.
On the 21st November, Edward wrote from Northampton,
asking for 300 arbalesters if the city could
provide so many; but the city could do no more
than furnish him with 120.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book D, fo. 165.</p></note> The fall of Berwick was
only postponed. In 1318 the great border fortress
against Scotland was captured by Bruce. Edward was
forced soon afterwards to come to terms with the
Earl of Lancaster and the barons with whom he
had so long been in avowed antagonism, and a general
pacification ensued, which received the sanction of
Parliament sitting at York in November.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, ii, 55, 56.</p></note> On the
4th December, the king sent home the foot soldiers
which the city had furnished, with a letter of thanks
for the aid they had afforded him. They were
immediately paid off and disbanded.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book E, fo. 84. (Memorials, pp. 128-129).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Dissension in the city, 1318-1319.</note>

<p>It was not long before the king and Lancaster
were preparing to join forces for the recovery of
Berwick. In the meantime, the Barons of the
Exchequer appeared at the Guildhall (25th February,
1319), and summoned the mayor, sheriffs and aldermen
to answer for certain trespasses. Several holders
of office, and among them Edmund le Lorimer, Gaoler
of Newgate, for whom Hugh le Despenser had solicited
the Small Beam, were deposed: a proceeding
which gave rise to much bickering between mayor,
aldermen and commons. Disputes, moreover, had
arisen in the city touching the election and removal
of the mayor, sheriffs and aldermen of the city, which<pb n="142" /><anchor id="Pg142" />
required some pressure from the Earl Marshal and
other of the king's ministers, sitting in the Chapter-house
of St. Paul's, before peace could be restored.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 285.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Articles for the better government of the city confirmed
by the king, 8th June, 1319.</note>

<p>According to the writer of the French Chronicle,
to which reference has frequently been made,<note place="foot"><p>Aungier's French Chron. (Riley's translation), p. 252.</p></note> the
dissension in the city was mainly attributable to John
de Wengrave, the mayor. The citizens had lately been
busy drawing up certain "points" for a new charter.
Wengrave, who was at the time, or until quite recently,
the city's Recorder, had contrived, in 1318, to force
himself into the mayoralty having served as mayor
the two years preceding&mdash;"against the will of the
commons." He had shown no little opposition to
the "points" of the proposed charter, possibly because
one of the points precluded the mayor, for the time
being, from drawing or hearing pleas, saving only
"those pleas which, as mayor, he ought to hear,
according to the custom of the city."<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust. (Rolls Series) i, 269.</p></note> If this
received the king's approval, Wengrave's occupation
as Recorder, at least so long as he was mayor, was
gone. However this may be, the mayor's opposition
was rendered futile, and the articles were confirmed
by the king's letters patent.<note place="foot"><p>Dated York, 8th June, 1319. These letters patent are preserved
at the Guildhall (Box No. 4). Ten days later [18th June] Edward
granted an ample inspeximus charter to the city, the original of which
does not appear among the archives. <hi rend="font-style: italic">See</hi> Lib. Cust. i, pp. 255-273.</p></note> Their main feature has
already been alluded to; thenceforth the direct way
to the civic franchise was to be through membership
of one of the civic guilds. A foreigner or stranger,
not a member of a guild, could only obtain it by
appealing to the full body of citizens before admission<pb n="143" /><anchor id="Pg143" /><index index="toc" level1="PROCEEDINGS AT THE ITER OF 1321." />
through the Court of Husting. Conscious of their
newly acquired importance, the guilds began to array
themselves in liveries, and "a good time was about
to begin."<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron. (Riley's translation), p. 253.</p></note> Edward did not give his assent to these
articles without receiving a <hi rend="font-style: italic">quid pro quo</hi>. The citizens
were mulcted in a sum of £1,000 before the king's
seal was set to the letters patent.<note place="foot"><p>In this year [1318-19] the new charter was confirmed by the
king, and cost £1,000. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 252.</p></note> They did not
mind this so much as they did the annoyance caused
by the king's justiciars eighteen months later.</p>

<note place="margin">The Iter at the Tower of 1321.</note>

<p>Early in 1321 commenced a memorable Iter at
the Tower which lasted twenty-four weeks and three
days. No such Iter had been held before, although
the last Iter held in 1275 had been a remarkable one
for the courageous conduct of Gregory de Rokesle,
the mayor. This was to surpass every other session
of Pleas of the Crown in its powers of inquisition, and
was destined to draw off many a would-be loyal
citizen from the king's side. Its professed object was
to examine into unlawful "colligations, confederations,
and conventions by oaths," which were known (or
supposed) to have been formed in the city.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, Introd., vol. ii, p. lxxxiv.</p></note> The
following particulars of its proceedings are gathered
from an account preserved in the city's records and
supervised, if not compiled, by Andrew Horn, the
city's Chamberlain, an able lawyer who was employed
as Counsel for the city during at least a portion of the
Iter.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust. (Rolls Series) i, 285-432.</p></note> The annoyance caused by this Iter, the general
stoppage of trade and commerce, the hindrance of
municipal business, is realised when we consider that<pb n="144" /><anchor id="Pg144" />
for six months not only the mayor, sheriffs and
aldermen for the time being, but everyone who had
filled any office in the city since the holding of
the last Iter&mdash;a period of nearly half a century&mdash;as
well as twelve representatives from each ward,
were called upon to be in constant attendance. All
charters were to be produced, and persons who had
grievances of any kind were invited to appear. Great
commotion prevailed among the citizens upon receiving
the king's writ, and they at once addressed themselves
to examining the procedure followed at former Iters.
It is probable, as Mr. Riley suggests, that for this
purpose they had resort to the "Ordinances of the
Iter" already mentioned as set out in the city's Liber
Albus.<note place="foot"><p>Rolls Series i, 51-60. Copies of the Ordinances are also to be
found in the Liber Horn (fos. 209, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi>) and Liber Ordinationum (fos.
154b <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi>) of the city's archives.</p></note> When the dreaded day arrived and the
justiciars had taken their seat at the Tower, the mayor
and aldermen, who, according to custom, as already
seen in Rokesley's day, were assembled at the church
of All Hallows Barking, sent a deputation to welcome
them, and to make a formal request for a safe conduct
to the citizens on entering the Tower. This favour
being granted, the king's commission was read.</p>

<note place="margin">Complaint of negligence of duty by the sheriffs.</note>

<p>The opening of the Iter did not augur well for the
city. Fault was found, at the outset, by Geoffrey le
Scrop, the king's sergeant-pleader, because the sheriffs
had not attended so promptly as they should have done.
The excuse that they had only acted according to custom
in waiting for the grant of a safe conduct was held
unsatisfactory, and nothing would please him but that
the city should be at once taken into the king's hand.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust. i, 289, 308.</p></note></p>

<pb n="145" /><anchor id="Pg145" /><index index="toc" level1="CLAIMS PUT FORWARD BY THE CITY." />

<note place="margin">The city claims to record its custom by mouth of the Recorder.</note>

<p>Again, when the citizens claimed to record their
liberties and customs by word of mouth without being
compelled to reduce them into writing, as the justices
had ordered, the only reply they got was that they
did so at their own peril.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust., i, 296.</p></note> Three days were consumed
in preliminary discussion of points of etiquette
and questions of minor importance.</p>

<note place="margin">the 4th day of the Iter.</note>

<p>On the fourth day the mayor and citizens put in
their claim of liberties, which they supported by
various charters.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 308-322.</p></note> The justiciars desired answers on
three points, which were duly made,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 322-324.</p></note> and matters
seemed to be getting forward when there arrived orders
from the king that the justiciars should enquire as to
the ancient right of the aldermen to record their
liberties orally in the king's courts. Having heard
what the citizens had to say on this point, the
justiciars were instructed to withhold their judgment;
and this and other questions touching the
liberties of the city were to be postponed for future
determination.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 324-325.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The 9th day of the Iter.</note>

<p>On the ninth day of the Iter, a long schedule,
containing over 100 articles upon which the Crown
desired information, was delivered to each ward of
the city.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 347-362.</p></note> Days and weeks were consumed in considering
various presentments, besides private suits
and pleas of the Crown. Suits were determined in
the Great Hall of the Tower facing the Thames,
whilst pleas of the Crown were heard in the Lesser
Hall, beneath the eastern tower. The justiciars
occasionally protracted their sittings till dusk, much
to the disgust of the citizens, whose business was<pb n="146" /><anchor id="Pg146" />
necessarily at a stand-still, and as yet no indictments
had been made.<note place="foot"><p>"Et fuit illo die post horam vesperarum antequam Justiciarii et
duodenæ perfiniebant; sed neminem eodem die indictaverunt."&mdash;Lib.
Cust., i, 366.</p></note> These were to come.</p>

<note place="margin">Indictment against a late mayor.</note>

<p>On the thirty-fourth day of the Iter, John de
Gisors was indicted for having during his mayoralty
(1311-1313), admitted a felon to the freedom of the
city, and fraudulently altered the date of his admission.
The question of criminality turned upon this date. Had
the felony been committed before or after admission?
The accused declared in his defence that admission to
the freedom had taken place before the felony; a jury,
however, came to the opposite conclusion, and not
only found that admission had taken place after an
indictment for the felony, but that the mayor at the
time was aware of the indictment. The judges
therefore ordered Gisors into custody. He was soon
afterwards released on bail, but not without paying
a fine of 100 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust., i, 371-374.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city taken into the king's hand.</note>

<p>A similar indictment against his son Anketin, as
having participated in his father's offence, failed.
Within a week of Gisors's indictment, the mayor for
the time being, Nicholas de Farndon, was deposed,
and the city placed in the hands of Sir Robert de
Kendale, the king's commissioner.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 378. Chron. Edward I and
II, i, 291. Aungier, Fr. Chron., p. 253.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Adjournment of the Iter over  Easter.</note>

<p>For nine weeks in succession the citizens had
suffered from the inconveniences of the Iter, when a
brief adjournment over Easter took place. In the
meantime, an assay was held at the Guildhall of the
new weights and measures which Walter Stapleton,
Bishop of Exeter, had, in his capacity as the king's<pb n="147" /><anchor id="Pg147" /><index index="toc" level1="CONTINUATION OF THE ITER." />
treasurer, caused to be issued throughout the country.
One result of the trial was that whilst the city's
weight of eight marks was discovered to be slightly
deficient, the city's bushel was found to be more true
than the king's.</p>

<note place="margin">Sudden change in the attitude of the judges after Easter.</note>

<p>After Easter the sittings of the justiciars were
resumed. A great change, however, had come over
them during the recess. They no longer behaved
"like lions eager for their prey; on the contrary, they
had become very lambs."<note place="foot"><p>"Qui cum quasi leones parati ad prædam ante Pascham extitissent,
nunc, versa vice, quasi agni vicissim facti sunt."&mdash;Lib. Cust., i,
383-384.</p></note> The reason for this sudden
change, we are told, was the insurrection in Wales,
under the Earl of Hereford, the king's brother-in-law.</p>

<note place="margin">Andrew Horn appears as counsel for the City.</note>

<p>The chief questions discussed before the justices
were the right of the weavers of London to hold their
guild, and the right of the fishmongers of Fish-wharf
to sell their fish at their wharf by retail instead
of on their vessels or at the city markets. The claim
of the fishmongers was opposed by Andrew Horn,
himself a fishmonger by trade, as well as an eminent
lawyer, who acted on this occasion as leading counsel
for the City.</p>

<note place="margin">The indictment brought against the Constable of the Tower.</note>

<p>When Whitsuntide was approaching, an indictment
was brought by the city wards against their old
enemy John de Crombwelle, the Constable of the
Tower. He had already made himself obnoxious to
the citizens by attempting to enclose a portion of the
city's lands;<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. i, 216, 272.</p></note> and now he was accused of seizing a
small vessel laden with tiles, and converting the same
to his own use, and further, with taking bribes for<pb n="148" /><anchor id="Pg148" />
allowing unauthorised "kidels" to remain in the
Thames. The judges, having heard what he had to
say in defence, postponed the further hearing until
after Trinity Sunday (14th June). In the meantime,
the citizens had the gratification of seeing the
constable removed from office, for allowing the
Tower to fall into such a dilapidated state, that the
rain came in upon the queen's bed, while giving birth
to a daughter, afterwards known as Joanna of the
Tower,<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust., i, 408, 409.</p></note> and destined to become the wife of David
the Second, King of Scotland.</p>

<note place="margin">The Iter brought to a sudden termination. 4 July, 1321.</note>

<p>On the judges resuming their sittings after
Trinity Sunday, they sat no longer in the Great Hall
or the Lesser Hall, "as well by reason of the queen
being in childbed there, as already mentioned, as of
the fortifying of the Tower, through fear of the
Earl of Hereford and his accomplices, who were in
insurrection on every side." Temporary buildings
had to be found for them. A fortnight later there
were signs of the Iter being brought to an abrupt
termination, the citizens having represented that they
could not possibly keep proper watch and ward owing
to disturbances consequent to the holding of the
Iter;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 425.</p></note> and within a week, viz., on 4th July, it was
actually closed.</p>

<note place="margin">The mayoralty restored to the city.</note>

<p>It was the bursting of the storm which had long
been gathering against the king's new favourites, the
Despensers, father and son, that caused the sudden
termination of the Iter, and it was the fear lest he
should lose the support of the city against Lancaster
and his allies that caused the king quickly to restore<pb n="149" /><anchor id="Pg149" /><index index="toc" level1="HAMO DE CHIGWELL, MAYOR." />
to the citizens their Mayor. Hamo de Chigwell took
the place of the deposed Farndon.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 291. The precise date of his election
is not known. Bishop Stubbs, in his introduction to the Chronicle
cited (i, p. lxxxii), states it to have taken place in January. This can
hardly have been the case, inasmuch as the city had not been taken
into the king's hands before the middle of February&mdash;forty-one days
after the commencement of the Iter. See Lib. Cust. i, p. 378.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City promises to support the king, July, 1321.</note>

<p>Within a few hours of the closing of the Iter
Chigwell and the aldermen were summoned to
Westminster to say whether they would be willing
to support the king and to preserve the city of London
to his use in his contest with the barons. Edward
and his council received for answer that the mayor
and his brethren "were unwilling to refuse the safe
keeping of the city," but would keep it for the king
and his heirs. They were thereupon enjoined to prepare
a scheme for its defence for submission to the
king's council, and this was accordingly done.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book E, fos. 119b-120 (Memorials, pp. 142-144).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Letter from the Earl of Hereford and the City's reply.</note>

<p>The city was, however, wavering in its support;
Chigwell did his best to hold the balance between
king and baron, and to hold a middle course, avoiding
offence as far as was possible to one side and the
other. After the lapse of a few days, a letter came
from the Earl of Hereford, addressed to the mayor,
sheriffs, aldermen and commonalty of the city, asking
for an interview. It was then decided, after due deliberation
in the Court of Husting, to ask Edward's advice
on the matter before returning an answer. At first
the king was disinclined to allow the interview,
but when the lords approached nearer London, and
resistance would have been hopeless, he gave way,
and a deputation was appointed to meet the lords at
the Earl of Lancaster's house in Holborn. To them<pb n="150" /><anchor id="Pg150" />
the earl explained the aim and object of himself and
his confederates. They were desirous of nothing so
much as the good of the realm and the overthrow of
the Despensers, father and son, who led the king astray
and had caused the Iter to be held at the Tower in
order to injure the city. Having listened to the earl's
statement, the recorder, on behalf of the deputation,
asked for a few days' delay in order to consult with
the mayor and commonalty. The matter was laid
before an assembly which comprised representatives
from each ward (30th July), and again it was resolved
to ask the king's advice. At length a reply was sent
to the lords to the effect that the citizens would
neither aid the Despensers nor oppose the lords, but
the city would in the meantime be strongly guarded
for the preservation of order. With this the lords
were satisfied.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 293, 296.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Terms arranged between the king and the lords, 14 August.</note>

<p>A fortnight later (14th August) the king, moved
by the intercession of the Earl of Pembroke, the
bishops, and his queen, yielded to the lords, and an
agreement between them was reduced to writing and
publicly read in Westminster Hall.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 297.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Chigwell continued in the mayoralty.</note>

<p>Chigwell's conduct throughout met with so much
favour from the citizens as well as from the king that
when the latter issued letters patent<note place="foot"><p>Dated, Boxle, 25 October. Patent Roll 15, Edward II, Part 1,
m. ii.</p></note> granting a free
election of a mayor in October of this year, it was
decided to continue Chigwell in office without a fresh
election.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, p. 298. Re-elected "by the commons
at the king's wish."&mdash;Aungier Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), p. 254.</p></note></p>

<pb n="151" /><anchor id="Pg151" /><index index="toc" level1="MILITARY SERVICE OF LONDONERS." />

<note place="margin">The queen insulted by Lady Badlesmere.</note>

<p>Such popularity as the king had for a time
achieved by his concession to the demands of the
lords, however unwillingly made, was enhanced by
another circumstance. An insult had been offered to
the queen by Lady Badlesmere, who had refused to
admit her into her castle at Ledes, co. Kent, when on
her way to Canterbury. The queen was naturally
indignant, and the unexpected energy displayed by
Edward in avenging the insult gave fresh strength to
his cause. With the assistance of a contingent sent
by the citizens of London, the king beseiged the
castle, and, having taken it, hanged the governor.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, pp. 298-299.</p></note>
Sir Bartholomew de Badlesmere, the owner of the
castle, was afterwards taken and put to death at
Canterbury.</p>

<note place="margin">Attempt to issue a "charter of service."</note>

<p>Elated with his success, the king forthwith proceeded
to issue "a charter of service"&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, a charter
binding the citizens to serve him in future wars&mdash;which
he wished the good people of London to have
sealed, "but the people of the city would not accede
to it for all that the king could do."<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron., pp. 254, 255.</p></note> In the place
of this charter, however, he was induced to grant
the citizens one of a diametrically opposite nature,
whereby it was provided that the aids granted by the
citizens upon this occasion should not be prejudicial
to the mayor and citizens, nor be looked upon as
establishing a precedent.<note place="foot"><p>The charter, dated Aldermaston, 12th December, 15 Edward II
[<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1321], with seal (imperfect) attached, is preserved at the Guildhall
(Box No. 4.)</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Londoners at Boroughbridge, 16 March, 1322.</note>

<p>Having thus secured an acknowledgment of their
rights, the citizens were ready enough to waive them<pb n="152" /><anchor id="Pg152" />
when occasion required. The battle of Boroughbridge
(16 March, 1322) was won for the king by the aid
of Londoners. We know, at least, that when he
started from London at the close of 1321 he was
accompanied by five hundred men at arms from the
city, and one hundred and twenty more were sent
after him on the 3rd March.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 301.&mdash;Aungier. Fr. Chron. (Riley's
transl.). p. 255.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The character of the citizen soldier in the field.</note>

<p>The Londoners were by no means to be despised
in the field. Froissart describes them as being very
dangerous when once their blood was up, and slaughter
on the battle field only gave them fresh courage.<note place="foot"><p>"Car c'est le plus perilleux peuple [sc. the English] qui soit au
monde et plus outrageux et orgueilleux et de tous ceux d' Angleterre les
Londriens sont chefs ... ils sont fors durs et hardis et haux en
courage; tant plus voyent de sang respandu et plus sont cruels et moins
ebahis."&mdash;Froissart's Hist. (ed. Lyon, 1559), pp. 333-334.</p></note>
A late writer<note place="foot"><p>Macaulay, Hist., cap. iii.</p></note> who was pleased to describe the
city's military force as "an army of drapers' apprentices
and journeymen tailors, with common councilmen
for captains and aldermen for colonels," gave
it credit, nevertheless, for natural courage, which, combined
with befitting equipment and martial discipline,
rendered the force a valuable ally and a formidable
enemy.</p>

<note place="margin">Defeat and execution of the Earl of Lancaster, March, 1322.</note>

<p>The Earl of Lancaster, who was made prisoner
at Boroughbridge, and afterwards executed before his
own castle at Pomfret, had come to be a great
favourite with the Londoners, in whose eyes he
appeared as the champion of the oppressed against
the strong. His memory was long cherished in the
city, and miracles were believed to have taken place&mdash;the
crooked made straight, the blind receiving sight<pb n="153" /><anchor id="Pg153" /><index index="toc" level1="ESCAPE OF MORTIMER FROM THE TOWER." />
and the deaf hearing&mdash;before the tablet he had set up
in St. Paul's commemorative of the king's submission
to the Ordinances. Edward ordered the removal of
the tablet, but it was again set up as soon as all
power had passed from his hands.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier. Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), pp. 257, 264.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward again despotic, 1322-1323.</note>

<p>Edward, again a free ruler, lost no time in revoking
these Ordinances. The elder Despenser he
raised to the earldom of Winchester.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. i, 303.</p></note> This was in
May, 1322; a year later (April, 1323), he deposed
Chigwell, who had again been re-elected to the
mayoralty in the previous October, and put in his
place Nicholas de Farndon,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i. 305.  Aungier. Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), p. 257.</p></note> thus reversing the order
of things in 1321, when Farndon had been deposed
and his place taken by Chigwell.</p>

<p>The deposed mayor, however, was ordered to
keep close attendance on the Court, as were also
three other London citizens, viz.: Hamo Godchep,
Edmund Lambyn, and Roger le Palmere; and in the
following November he recovered his position,<note place="foot"><p>By the king's writ, dated Ravensdale, 29 Nov., Letter Book E.
fo. 148. According to the French Chronicle (Aungier, p. 258) Chigwell
recovered the mayoralty on the feast of St. Nicholas [6 Dec.].
On the 7th Dec. he was admitted and sworn into office.</p></note> and
held it for the rest of Edward's reign.</p>

<note place="margin">Escape of Roger Mortimer from the Tower. Aug. 1323.</note>

<p>The king's triumph was destined to be short-lived.
In August, 1323, Roger Mortimer, a favourite
of the queen, effected his escape from the Tower,
where he had lain prisoner since January, 1322. The
divided feeling of the citizens which had been more
or less apparent since the year of the great Iter, now
began to assert itself. Mortimer's escape had taken<pb n="154" /><anchor id="Pg154" />
place with the connivance, if not active assistance, of
a leading citizen, Richard de Betoyne, and he took
sanctuary on the property of another leading citizen,
John Gisors.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 301, 305, 318 n.</p></note> In November the citizens thought fit
to close their gates, to prevent surprise.<note place="foot"><p>"Propter insidiantes domini regis et aliorum malorum hominum."&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>,
i, 306.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A feud between the Weavers and the Goldsmiths, 1324.</note>

<p>In the following year (1324), a quarrel broke out
between two of the city guilds, the weavers and the
goldsmiths. Fights took place in the streets and
lives were lost.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 307.</p></note> How far, if at all, such a quarrel
had any political significance it is difficult to say, but
it is not unlikely, at a time when the guilds were
winning their way to chartered rights, that occasionally
their members took sides in the political
struggle that was then being carried on.</p>

<note place="margin">Departure of the queen for France, 9 March, 1324.</note>

<p>Edward, in the meanwhile, was threatened with
war by France, unless he consented to cross the sea
and do homage to the French king for the possessions
he held in that country. This the Despensers
dared not allow him to do. A compromise was therefore
effected. Queen Isabel, who was not sorry for
an opportunity of quitting the side of a husband who
had seized all her property, removed her household,
and put her on board wages at twenty shillings
a day,<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron., p. 259.</p></note> undertook, with the king's assent, to revisit
her home and to bring about a settlement.
Accordingly, on the 9th March,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 308. Easter is given as the date of
her departure by the Fr. Chron. (p. 259), Easter Day falling on the
15th April in that year.</p></note> 1324, she crossed
over to France, where she was afterwards joined by
Mortimer and her son.</p>

<pb n="155" /><anchor id="Pg155" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY LOST TO EDWARD II." />

<note place="margin">Her return to England, 24 September, 1326.</note>

<p>Once on the continent, the queen threw off the
mask, and immediately began to concert measures
against the king and the Despensers. By negotiating
a marriage for her son with the daughter of the
Count of Hainault, she contrived to raise supporters
in England, whilst by her affected humility and
sorrow, displayed by wearing simple apparel as one
that mourned for her husband, she won the sympathy
of all who beheld her.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), p. 260.</p></note> The king, on the
other hand, publicly forbade any one holding correspondence
with her, caused provisions to be laid up in
the Tower in case of emergency, and prepared a
fleet to prevent her landing.</p>

<note place="margin">The City lost to Edward.</note>

<p>It was all in vain. The majority of the citizens
had made up their mind to give him no more
support. On the 24th September, 1326, Isabel, in
spite of all precautions, effected a landing near
Harwich; and Edward, as soon as he was made
aware of her arrival in England, took fright and left
London for the west. The queen, who was accompanied
by her son and her "gentle Mortimer," gave
out that she came as an avenger of Earl Thomas,
whose memory was yet green in the minds of the
citizens, and as the enemy of the Despensers.<note place="foot"><p>See her proclamation issued at Wallingford, 15th Oct. Rymer's
Fœdera, vol. ii, part 1, pp. 645, 646.</p></note> Adherents
quickly came in from all sides, and with
these she leisurely (<hi rend="font-style: italic">quasi peregrinando</hi>) followed up
the king.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 314, 315.</p></note></p>

<p>In the meantime a letter had been despatched to
the city in her name and that of her son, desiring its<pb n="156" /><anchor id="Pg156" />
assistance in destroying "the enemies of the land."
To this letter, we are told, no answer was sent
"through fear of the king." Another letter was therefore
sent to the same effect, in which Hugh Despenser
was especially named as one to be destroyed, and an
immediate answer was requested.<note place="foot"><p>Dated Baldock, 6 Oct., 1326.  City's Records, Pleas and
Memoranda, Roll A I, membr. x (12).</p></note> This letter was
affixed to the cross in Cheapside and copies circulated
through the city.</p>

<p>On the 15th October, the city broke out into
open rebellion. The mayor and other leading men
had gone to the house of the Blackfriars to meet the
Bishops of London and Exeter. The mob, now fairly
roused by the queen's second letter, hurried thither
and forced them to return to the Guildhall, the timid
Chigwell "crying mercy with clasped hands," and
promising to grant all they required. A proclamation
was made shortly afterwards to the effect that "the
enemies to the king and the queen and their son"
should depart the city.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier. Fr. Chron. (Riley's translation), pp. 262, 263.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The murder of Bishop Stapleton, 15 October, 1326.</note>

<p>One unfortunate man, John le Marchall, suspected
of being employed by Hugh Despenser as a spy,
was seized and incontinently beheaded in Cheapside.
The mob, having tasted blood, hastened to sack the
house of Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, who as
Edward's treasurer, had confiscated the queen's property.
It so happened, that the bishop himself,
attended by two esquires, was riding towards the city
intending to have his midday meal at his house in Old
Dean's Lane (now Warwick Lane), before proceeding
to the Tower. Hearing cries of "Traitor!" he<pb n="157" /><anchor id="Pg157" /><index index="toc" level1="MURDER OF BISHOP STAPLETON." />
guessed that something was wrong, and made for
sanctuary in St. Paul's. He was caught, however,
just as he was about to enter the north door, dragged
from his horse, carried to Chepe, and there put to
death in the same way as John le Marchall had been
executed a short hour before.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 315, 316. Aungier, Fr. Chron., p. 263.</p></note></p>

<p>The bishop's two attendant esquires also perished
at the hands of the mob. Their bodies were allowed
to lie stark naked all that day in the middle of Chepe.
The head of the bishop was sent to the queen at
Gloucester,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, ii, 310. Murimuth, Chron. (Eng. Hist.
Soc.), p. 48.</p></note> but his corpse was reverently carried into
St. Paul's after vespers by the canons and vicars of the
cathedral. It was not allowed, however, to remain
there long; for hearing that the bishop had died under
sentence of excommunication, the authorities caused
it to be removed to the church of St. Clement Danes,
near which stood the bishop's new manor house of
which we are reminded at the present day by Exeter
Hall. The parish church was in the gift of the
Bishop of Exeter for the time being, and John Mugg,
then rector, owed his preferment to Stapleton. He
was, therefore, guilty of gross ingratitude when he
refused to take in the corpse of his patron, or to allow
it the rites of burial. Certain poor women had more
compassion; they at least cast a piece of old cloth
over the corpse for decency's sake and buried it out of
sight, although without any attempt to make a grave
and "without any office of priest or clerk." Thus,
it remained till the following month of February,
when it was disinterred and taken to Exeter. The<pb n="158" /><anchor id="Pg158" />
treatment of Bishop Stapleton caused other prelates to
look to themselves, and many of them, including the
primate himself, began to make overtures of submission
to Queen Isabel.</p>

<p>After the Bishop's murder there was no pretence
of government in the city. The mob did exactly as
they liked. They sacked the houses of Baldock, the
Chancellor, and carried off the treasure he had laid
up in St. Paul's. The property of the Earl of Arundel,
recently executed at Hereford, which lay in the
Priory of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, shared the same
fate. The banking house of the Bardi, containing the
wealth accumulated by the younger Despenser, was
sacked under cover of night. The Tower was entered,
the prisoners set free, and new officers appointed.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 321, ii, 310. Aungier, Fr. Chron.
(Riley's translation), p. 264. Murimuth (Eng. Hist. Soc.), pp. 48, 49.</p></note>
All this was done in the face of a proclamation, calling
upon the citizens to sink their differences and to
settle their disputes by lawful means.<note place="foot"><p>The proclamation is headed, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Proclamacio prima post decessum
episcopi Exoniensis et ipsius decollacionem.</hi>&mdash;City's Records, Pleas and
Memoranda, Roll A 1, membr. 2 dors.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The queen confirms to the citizens their right to elect their mayor, Nov., 1326.</note>

<note place="margin">Betoyne elected mayor.</note>

<p>When the Feast of St. Simon and Jude again
came round, and Chigwell's term of office expired by
efflux of time, no election of a successor took place,
but on the 15th November, the Bishop of Winchester
paid a visit to the Guildhall, where, after receiving
the freedom of the city, and swearing "to live and
die with them in the cause, and to maintain the
franchise," he presented a letter from the queen,
permitting the citizens freely to elect their mayor as
in the days before the Iter of 1321, for since that time
no mayor had been elected, save only by the king's<pb n="159" /><anchor id="Pg159" /><index index="toc" level1="DEATH OF THE KING." />
favour.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron., p. 265.</p></note> They at once elected Richard de Betoyne,
whom the queen had that day appointed Warden of
the Tower, conjointly with John de Gisors.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 318.</p></note> Thus
were these two aldermen recompensed for the
assistance they had rendered Mortimer in his escape
from the Tower.</p>

<note place="margin">Public declaration in favour of the queen and the City's rights. 13 Jan., 1327.</note>

<p>On the 13th January, 1327&mdash;exactly one week
before the king met his wretched end in Berkeley
Castle&mdash;Mortimer came to the Guildhall with a large
company including the Archbishop of Canterbury and
several bishops, and one and all made oath to
maintain the cause of the queen and of her son, and
to preserve the liberties of the City of London. This
was solemnly done in the presence of the mayor, the
chamberlain, Andrew Horn, and a vast concourse of
citizens. The Archbishop, who had offended many
of the citizens by annulling the decree of exile passed
against the Despensers in 1321, now sought their
favour by the public offer of a gift to the commonalty
of 50 tuns of wine.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 323. Pleas and Memoranda, Roll
A 1, memb. 2.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="160" /><anchor id="Pg160" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VII.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">Edward's charter to the city, 6 March, 1327.</note>

<p>Edward III was only fourteen years of age when
he succeeded to the throne. For the first three years
of his reign the government of the country was practically
in the hands of Mortimer, his mother's paramour;
and it was no doubt by his advice and that of the
queen-mother that the young king rewarded the
citizens of London, who had shown him so much
favour, by granting them not only a general pardon<note place="foot"><p>Dated 28 February, 1326-7. Chron. Edward I and II, i,
325-326.</p></note>
for offences committed since he set foot in England
in September, 1326, but also a charter confirming and
enlarging their ancient liberties.<note place="foot"><p>Dated 6 March, 1326-7. Preserved at the Guildhall (Box No. 5).</p></note></p>

<p>This latter charter, which has been held to be of
the force of an Act of Parliament,<note place="foot"><p>In <hi rend="font-style: italic">re</hi> Islington Market Bill, 3 Clk, 513. See also Stat. 5 and 6,
William IV, cap. cxi, ss. 46 <hi rend="font-style: italic">et seq.</hi></p></note> established (among
other things) the ferm of the Sheriffwick of London
and Middlesex at the original sum of £300 per annum,
instead of the increased rental of £400 which had
been paid since 1270;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Vide sup.</hi>, p. 104.</p></note> it appointed the mayor one of
the justices at the gaol delivery of Newgate, as well as
the king's escheator of felon's goods within the city;
it gave the citizens the right of devising real estate
within the city; it restored to them all the privileges
they had enjoyed before the memorable Iter of the<pb n="161" /><anchor id="Pg161" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY MARKET MONOPOLY." />
last reign; and granted to them a monopoly of markets
within a circuit of seven miles of the city.<note place="foot"><p>According to the common law of the land, no market could be
erected so as to be a "nuisance" to another market within a less distance
than six miles and a half and a third of another half.&mdash;Bracton
"De Legibus Angliæ" (Rolls Series No. 70), iii, 584.</p></note> These
two charters&mdash;the charter of pardon and the charter
of liberties&mdash;together with another charter<note place="foot"><p>Dated 4 March, 1326-7.</p></note> releasing
the citizens from all debts due to the late king, were
publicly read and explained in English to the citizens
assembled at the Guildhall by Andrew Horn, the
Chamberlain, on the 9th March.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 325.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City sends a contingent to assist the king against the Scots.</note>

<p>Scarcely was he knighted and crowned king
before necessity compelled him to take the field
against the Scots. The Londoners were, as usual,
called upon to supply a contingent towards the forces
which had been ordered to assemble at Newcastle-upon-Tyne.<note place="foot"><p>The king's letters asking for assistance were dated from Nottingham,
29 April and 2 May.&mdash;City's Records, Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1,
membr. iv dors, and ix.</p></note>
They responded to the king's appeal
by sending 100 horsemen fully equipped, each one
supplied with the sum of 100 shillings at least for
expenses, and a further contingent of 100 foot-men.
They made their rendezvous at West Smithfield,
whence they proceeded to "la Barnette."<note place="foot"><p>The names of the troopers are set out in full, under the several
wards, in Pleas and Memoranda, Roll A I, memb. ix. The compiler
of the "Annales Paulini" (Chron. Edward I and II, i. 333), gives the
number of the City contingent as 100 men, adding feelingly "sed proh
pudor! nil boni ibi facientes sine honore revertuntur."</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">This act not to be made a precedent.</note>

<p>Whilst furnishing this aid to the king the citizens
were anxious that their liberality should not be
misconstrued, or tend to establish a precedent in
derogation of their chartered privileges. Their fears<pb n="162" /><anchor id="Pg162" />
on this score were set at rest by the receipt of letters
patent from the king declaring that their proceedings
on this occasion should not be to their prejudice.<note place="foot"><p>Dated Topclyf, 10 July.&mdash;Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr.
ii (4).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City's representatives at the Parliament at Lincoln, Sept., 1327.</note>

<p>A parliament held in September, at Lincoln, in
which the citizens were represented by Benedict de
Fulsham and Robert de Kelseye,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. iii.</p></note> granted the king an
aid of a twentieth to defray expenses; and Hamo de
Chigwell, among others, was appointed by the king
to collect the tax from the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>Writ dated Lincoln, 23 September.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. v
(7) dors.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Petition against removing the courts and the exchequer to York.</note>

<p>The City's representatives were accompanied to
Lincoln by the mayor, Richard de Betoyne, who was
the bearer of letters under the seal of the commonalty
addressed to the king, the queen, and members of the
king's council praying that the courts of King's Bench
and Exchequer might not be removed from Westminster
to York.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1. memb. iii.&mdash;In July, 1323, the Exchequer had been
transferred from York to Westminster, "and great treasure therewith."&mdash;Aungier's
Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), p. 258.</p></note> The removal was inconvenient to
the city merchants, whatever advantage might accrue
to those dwelling in the north of England. Negotiations
between the City and the king on this subject
were protracted for some weeks; the king at length
promising that the courts should return to Westminster
as soon as the country was in a more settled
state.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1. membr. iii, and v (7).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Peace with Scotland, 1328.</note>

<p>The campaign against the Scots brought little
credit to either side, and terminated in a treaty, the
terms of which were for the most part arranged by<pb n="163" /><anchor id="Pg163" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CORONATION STONE." />
Mortimer and the queen-mother. One of the articles
of peace stipulated for the surrender of all proofs of
the subjection of Scotland; and accordingly the abbot
of Westminster received orders to deliver up the
stone of Scone to the Sheriffs of London for transmission
to Isabel, who was in the north.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Memoranda, Roll A 1. membr. xxii.</p></note> This the
abbot refused to do&mdash;"for reasons touching God and
the church,"&mdash;without further instructions from the
king and his council.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1. membr. xxii, dors.&mdash;According to the Chronicle of
Lanercost (Bannatyne Club, p. 261), it was the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Londoners</hi> who refused
to give up the stone.</p></note></p>

<p>When negotiations were opened in 1363 for the
union of the kingdoms of England and Scotland, it
was proposed that Edward should be crowned king
at Scone on the royal seat (<hi rend="font-style: italic">siége roial</hi>) which he
should cause to be returned from England. These
negotiations, however, fell through, and the stone
remains in Westminster Abbey to this day.<note place="foot"><p>Rymer's Fœdera (1830), Vol. iii, pt. ii, p. 716. Stanley's
Memorials of Westminster Abbey (2nd ed.), pp. 60-64.</p></note></p>

<p>The treaty which had been arranged at Edinburgh
(17 March, 1328), was afterwards confirmed by a
Parliament held at Northampton, in which the city
was represented by Richard de Betoyne and Robert
de Kelseye.<note place="foot"><p>Rymer's Fœdera (1821) Vol. ii, pt. ii, pp. 734, 740. Pleas
and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. xx dors. Chron. Edward I and II,
i. 339-340.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The revolt of the Earl of Lancaster, Oct., 1328.</note>

<p>When the terms of this treaty of Northampton
(as it was called) came to be fully understood, the
nation began to realise the measure of disgrace which
they involved, and Mortimer and the queen became
the objects of bitter hatred. Henry, Earl of Lancaster,<pb n="164" /><anchor id="Pg164" />
the king's nominal guardian, had grown weary of his
false position, and of serving only as Mortimer's tool.
Determined to throw off the yoke, he refused to attend
a parliament which met at Salisbury in October
(1328),<note place="foot"><p>The city was represented by Stephen de Abyndon and Robert de
Kelseye. The writ was dated Clipston, 28 August, and the return
made the 10th October.&mdash;Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1. membr. xxiii-xxiv.</p></note> unless certain changes in the government and
in the king's household were first made. In the meantime,
Bishop Stratford of Winchester and Thomas,
Lord Wake, two of his supporters, had paid a visit to
the city and had endeavoured to rouse the citizens to
action. The king, hearing of this, wrote to the municipal
authorities for an explanation. They frankly
acknowledged, in reply, that the bishop had been in
the city for the purpose of discussing the ill state of
affairs, and themselves expressed a hope, amid vows
of the utmost loyalty, that the king would redress
the grievances under which the nation suffered.<note place="foot"><p>Letter dated 27 September.&mdash;Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1,
membr. xxiii (27) dors.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The earl's letter to the City, 5 Nov., 1328.</note>

<p>Instead of attending the parliament at Salisbury,
the earl marched in full force to Winchester. On the
5th November he wrote to the citizens from Hungerford,
to the effect that he had made known to parliament
his honourable intentions, but had received no
reply; that the parliament had been adjourned to
London; that he had been informed of certain matters
about which he could not write, but which the bearer
would communicate to them; and he concluded with
assuring them that he desired nothing so much as the
king's honour and the welfare of the kingdom, and
declaring his implicit confidence in their loyalty.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. xxiv (28) dors.</p></note></p>

<pb n="165" /><anchor id="Pg165" /><index index="toc" level1="JOHN DE GRANTHAM ELECTED MAYOR." />

<note place="margin">The election of John de Grantham, mayor, in place of Chigwell.</note>

<p>The mayor of the city at this time was John de
Grantham. His election had taken place but recently,
and was the result of a compromise. Chigwell, who had
again been chosen mayor at the expiration of Betoyne's
year of office in 1327, was a decided favourite with the
citizens, notwithstanding a certain want of firmness of
character, and he was again put up as a candidate for
the mayoralty in October, 1328. He had enemies, of
course. Towards the close of his last mayoralty he
was ill-advised enough to sit in judgment upon a
brother alderman on a charge of having abused him
two years previously. During the troublous times of
1326, John de Cotun, alderman of Walbrook ward,
was alleged to have described Chigwell, who was
then mayor, as "the vilest worm that had been in
the city for twenty years," adding that the city would
know no peace so long as Chigwell was alive, and that
it would be a blessing if he lost his head.<note place="foot"><p>"Quod dictus Hamo fuit pessimus vermis qui venit in civitate jam
xx annis elapsis et amplius, et quod nunquam foret bona pax in civitate
dum viveret et quod bonum esset valde si capud ejus a corpore truncatur."&mdash;Pleas
and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. xxiii dors.</p></note> After some
hard swearing on both sides, leading to the discovery
of bad blood existing between the informer and the
alderman, the charge was dismissed.</p>

<p>At the outset it appeared that Chigwell's reelection
was assured; but the city as well as the
country was in a disturbed state, and political reasons
may have led to an endeavour to force another candidate
in the person of Benedict de Fulsham over his
head. Be that as it may, it is certain that when
Chigwell's name was proposed to the assembled
citizens at the Guildhall, the cry was raised of
"Fulsham! Fulsham!" So high did party spirit run,<pb n="166" /><anchor id="Pg166" />
that the election had to be postponed, and eventually
it was thought best that both candidates should be
withdrawn. This having been done, the choice of the
electors fell on John de Grantham, a pepperer.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. 29.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king desires a deputation from the city to meet him at Windsor, Nov., 1328.</note>

<p>On the 8th November the new mayor despatched
a letter to the king, expressing the joy of the city at
the news of a proposed visit, and the prospect of the
next parliament being held in London. His majesty
might be assured of the city's loyalty.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. 29 dors.</p></note> Four days
later (12 November), Edward despatched a messenger
from Reading with a letter to John de Grantham,
bidding him cause a deputation to be nominated for
the purpose of proceeding to Windsor. The messenger
arrived late on Sunday evening, and the deputation
was to be at Windsor on the following Tuesday. A
meeting was therefore summoned on Monday, when
six aldermen and six commoners were nominated to
meet the king. On Thursday the deputation returned
and reported the result of the interview. It appears
that Edward had complained to the deputation of
armed men having left the city to join the earl at
Winchester. He was also desirous to know if the city
was in a proper state of defence and the king's peace
preserved therein. On these points the mayor endeavoured
to satisfy him by letter of the 18th
November. As to armed men having left the city
for Winchester, his majesty was informed that none
had so left with the knowledge of the municipal
authorities, and if any should be found to have done
so, they would most assuredly be punished.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ibid.</hi>&mdash;Notwithstanding this disavowal,
it is said that no less than 600 Londoners assisted the Lancastrian
cause.&mdash;Chron. Edward I and II. Introd. Vol. i, p. cxx.</p></note></p>

<pb n="167" /><anchor id="Pg167" /><index index="toc" level1="THE KING AND THE EARL OF LANCASTER." />

<note place="margin">The king pays a short visit to London, Dec., 1328.</note>

<p>Early in December the king and queen came to
London, accompanied by the queen-mother and Mortimer,
and took up their quarters at Westminster.
The whole of the city went forth to welcome them,
and they were made the recipients of valuable gifts.
Their stay, however, lasted but one short week.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 343.&mdash;Letter Book E, fo. 179b.
(Memorials, pp. 170-171).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's letter from Gloucester to the Mayor, &amp;c., of London. 16 Dec., 1328.</note>

<p>By the 16th the king was at Gloucester, where
he wrote to the Mayor of London, enclosing a copy
of particulars of all that had passed between himself
and the Earl of Lancaster&mdash;the charges made by the
earl and his own replies&mdash;in order, as he said, that
the citizens might judge for themselves of the rights
of the quarrel between them. These particulars, the
mayor was desired to have publicly read at the Guildhall.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. 31.</p></note>
This was accordingly done (20 Dec.), in the
presence of some of the earl's supporters, who
took the opportunity of explaining the earl's position.<note place="foot"><p>See letter from the mayor, &amp;c., to the king informing him that his
wishes had been carried out.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1. membr. xxviii (32).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The bishops and barons in the city.</note>

<p>Whilst notifying the king that his wishes had
been complied with, the mayor and commonalty
besought him that all measures of hostility between
himself and the barons might be suspended until
parliament should meet. The city became the headquarters
of the dissatisfied bishops and nobles. The
Sunday before Christmas, the pulpit in St. Paul's was
occupied by the primate, who was equally anxious
with the civic authorities that matters should be left
to be adjusted by parliament.<note place="foot"><p>At Christmas, both the primate and the city despatched letters to
Edward, who was then at Worcester, to that effect.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1.
memb. xxviii (32).</p></note></p>

<pb n="168" /><anchor id="Pg168" />

<note place="margin">Failure of Lancaster to raise a confederation against the king. 2 Jan., 1329.</note>

<p>The barons in the city, in the meanwhile, awaited
the arrival of the Earl of Lancaster. On New Year's
day he came, and on the 2nd January (1329) a conference
of bishops and barons took place at St. Paul's.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. i, 343-344.</p></note>
The futility of an attempt to form a confederation
soon became apparent. The city stood fast to the
king; some of the barons wavered, and nothing was
left to Lancaster but to make the best terms he
could. Edward had already offered pardon to all
who should submit before the 7th January, with certain
exceptions.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1. membr. xxviii (32).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Trial at the Guildhall of those implicated with Lancaster. Feb., 1329.</note>

<p>Now that the king, or rather, we should say,
Mortimer, was once more master of the situation, the
citizens who had favoured the constitutional party
became the objects of retribution. On Sunday, the
22nd January (1329), the mayor and twenty-four
citizens were ordered to meet the king at St. Albans.
They returned on the following Thursday with instructions
to see if the city was prepared to punish those
who had favoured Lancaster. No sooner were the
king's wishes made known, than an enquiry was at
once set on foot. On Wednesday (1st February), the
deputation returned to the king, who was then at
Windsor, to report the sense of the city; and on the
following Sunday (4th February), the king's justices
commenced to sit at the Guildhall for the trial of
those implicated in the late abortive attempt to overthrow
Mortimer. Three days were consumed in preliminary
proceedings; and it was not until Wednesday
(8th February) that the real business of the session
commenced.  By that time the king himself had<pb n="169" /><anchor id="Pg169" /><index index="toc" level1="TRIAL OF HAMO DE CHIGWELL." />
come to London, and had taken up his headquarters
at the Tower, having passed through the city accompanied
by his consort, the queen-mother, and many
of the nobility.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. i, 242-243.</p></note> It does not appear that Mortimer
came with them.</p>

<note place="margin">Trial of Hamo de Chigwell, 13 Feb., 1329.</note>

<p>Among those who were brought to trial at the
Guildhall was Chigwell. He was accused of being
implicated in the abduction of the Abbot of Bury St.
Edmunds, and of feloniously receiving two silver
basins as his share of the plunder. Being convicted,
he claimed the benefit of clergy, and the Bishop of
London, after some delay, was allowed to take possession
of him on the ground that he was a clerk. His
life was thus saved and he was conveyed to the
episcopal prison amid general regret, although, as we
have already seen, he was not a universal favourite.
"Many said, he is a good man; others, nay, but he
deceiveth the people."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 245, 346.</p></note> He was kept for some
months in honourable confinement at the bishop's
manor of Orset, co. Essex, and early in 1330 was admitted
to purgation. Thus encouraged, he hastened
once more to return to the city. He was still popular
with a large body of the citizens, who, on hearing of
his approach, flocked to meet him, his re-entry into
the city being made to resemble a triumphal progress.
Both Isabel and her son were seized with alarm; and
a writ was forthwith issued for his arrest.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i. 246-247.</p></note> He was,
however, forewarned, and able to make his escape.
Little is known of his subsequent career; Stow places
his death in or about 1328, but this must be a mistake.
By his will dated 1332, he left some real estate in the<pb n="170" /><anchor id="Pg170" />
city to the dean and chapter of St. Paul's Cathedral
for the maintenance of a chantry.<note place="foot"><p>The will is enrolled in the records of the Court of Husting,
Roll 61 (17). His devise to St. Paul's was challenged by John de
Pulteney, and execution stayed.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Execution of Mortimer, 29 Nov., 1330.</note>

<p>Mortimer's vengeance was not confined to a few
leading citizens. Lancaster's life was spared, but he
was mulcted in a heavy fine. Many of his associates
took refuge in flight. The Earl of Kent, the king's
uncle, was shortly afterwards charged with treason,
into which he had been drawn by the subtlety of
Mortimer, and made to pay the penalty with his
head. This, more than anything else, opened the
king's eyes to Mortimer's true character, and at length
(Oct., 1339,) he caused him to be privily seized in the
castle of Nottingham.<note place="foot"><p>According to the compiler of the "Annales Paulini" (Chron.
Edward I and II, i, 352), Mortimer was taken "in camera Isabelle
reginæ."</p></note> Thence he was carried to
London, and hanged at the Elms in Smithfield.</p>

<note place="margin">The queen retires into privacy.</note>

<p>Queen Isabel, who witnessed the seizure of her
favourite and whose prayers to spare the "gentle
Mortimer" were of no avail, was made to disgorge
much of the wealth she had acquired during her
supremacy, and was put on an allowance. The rest
of her life, a period of nearly thirty years, she spent
in retirement. Before her death<note place="foot"><p>She died in 1357. and was buried in the church of the Grey Friars,
in the city.</p></note> she gave the sum
of forty shillings to the Abbess and Minoresses of
Aldgate of the Order of St. Clare, for the purpose of
purchasing for themselves two pittances or doles on
the anniversaries of the decease of her husband the
late king and of Sir John de Eltham his son.<note place="foot"><p>"The last days of Queen Isabella."&mdash;Archæol., vol. xxxv, p. 464.</p></note> The<pb n="171" /><anchor id="Pg171" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON MERCHANTS AND THE STAPLES." />
removal of Mortimer corresponded very closely with
the king's coming of age. He was now eighteen years
old, and thenceforth he "ruled as well as reigned."</p>

<note place="margin">Increase of trade with Flanders.</note>

<p>The king's marriage with Philippa of Hainault,
which had taken place at York on the 30th January,
1328, had been popular with the city<note place="foot"><p>On her first arrival in London she was conducted by a cavalcade
of citizens to the Bishop of Ely's house in Holborn, and after her
marriage, was made the recipient of a present of gold and silver and a
great store of all kinds of provisions. Her coronation, which took place
two years later (Feb., 1330), was also made the occasion for a further
display of their loyalty and affection.&mdash;Chron. Edward I and II, i,
338, 339, 349.</p></note> as tending to
open up trade with Flanders. Hitherto nearly all the
wool produced by this country had been sent to
Flanders for manufacture, the export trade being so
large that the king is said to have received more than
£30,000 in a single year from duties levied on this
commodity alone.<note place="foot"><p>Green, Hist. of the English People, i, 410. Imposts on wool,
writes Bishop Stubbs, became of such importance at this period that
"the merchants again seemed likely to furnish the realm with a new
estate."&mdash;Const. Hist., ii. 379.</p></note> We have already seen how, in
order to punish the Countess of Flanders for injuries
inflicted upon English merchants, the king's grandfather
resorted, in 1270, to the expedient of forbidding
all export of wool to her country.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Supra</hi>, pp. 112-115.</p></note> The misery which
her half-starved people were then compelled to suffer
soon induced the Countess to come to terms. It was
also in no small measure owing to the fear of a similar
stoppage by the intervention of the French fleet, that
the Flemings laid aside their neutrality in 1339, and
openly assisted Edward in his war with France.</p>

<note place="margin">The establishment of staples in England.</note>

<p>Towards the close of the last reign the "staples"
or market towns for the sale of certain commodities,<pb n="172" /><anchor id="Pg172" />
but more especially of wool, had been removed from
the continent and established at various places in England,
Ireland and Wales.<note place="foot"><p>"Eodem anno (<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, 1326) post Pascha dominus rex habuit consilium
apud Westmonasterium; et ordinatum fuit ibi quod mercatores
emerent lanas. corias et plumbum, in certis locis Angliæ, Walliæ et
Hyberniæ, et illa loca vocantur Stapel."&mdash;Chron. Edward I and II,
i, 312. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. 15.</p></note> London was one of those
places. No wool was to be exported abroad until it
had remained at one or another of the staples for a
period of forty days. This rule appears however to
have been relaxed by Edward II, in favour of all
staple towns but London; merchants being allowed to
remove their goods from other staples after a stay of
only fifteen days. The London merchants, therefore,
were under the disadvantage of finding the market
always forestalled. Edward III had not long been
on the throne before they took the opportunity of
submitting this hardship not only to the king, but
also to the queen-mother, and prayed that the relaxation
of the rule touching the forty days with respect
to other staples might be withdrawn.<note place="foot"><p>Dated 23 April, 1327. Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. i
(3) dors.</p></note> Their prayer,
however, would seem to have had but little effect,
for within a week of the petition to the king we find
that monarch issuing an order to the collector of
customs on wool, leather and wool-fells in the port
of London, to enforce the delay of forty days before
goods could be removed.<note place="foot"><p>Dated Nottingham, 30 April (1327). Rymer's Fœdera. Vol. ii,
pt. ii. p. 705.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A new tax on wool, leather, and wool-fells.</note>

<p>Nor was this the only grievance that the London
merchants had. In order to raise money to put down
the rebellion of the Scots which had broken out soon<pb n="173" /><anchor id="Pg173" /><index index="toc" level1="A NEW TAX ON WOOL." />
after his accession, he had recourse to an extra tax
upon wool, leather, and wool-fells. The money thus
raised was to be considered a loan, receipts being
given to the merchants under the king's seal, known
as "Coket," and the merchants in return were to be
allowed absolute free trade from the 2nd July, 1327,
the date of the writ, up to the following Christmas.<note place="foot"><p>Writ to the collector of dues in the port of London and other
places on both sides of the Thames as far as Gravesend. Dated Overton,
2 July, 1 Edward III (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</hi> 1327). Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1,
membr. 7 dors (cedula).</p></note>
The Londoners objected altogether to this impost, on
the grounds that they had never been consulted on
the matter, and had never given their assent.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. 7 dors.</p></note></p>

<p>A compromise was subsequently effected. In
consideration of the good service which the citizens
of London had already done to the king in times
past, and for the good service which they were prepared
to render again in the future, they were released
of arrears of the tax due from 2nd July to the
23rd September, provided they were willing to pay it
for the remainder of the term.<note place="foot"><p>Letters patent, dated Lincoln, 23 Sept., 1 Edward III (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</hi>
1327). <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. 7 dors.</p></note> After Christmas the
restrictions upon free trade were again enforced.<note place="foot"><p>Writ to sheriffs to see the restrictions carried out, dated York,
1 March, 2 Edward III (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</hi> 1327-8). <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. 24
dors.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proposal to remove the Staple to the continent, Feb., 1328.</note>

<p>On the 11th December (1327), Edward issued a
writ<note place="foot"><p>Dated from Coventry. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. 18 dors.</p></note> to the Sheriffs of London to choose two representatives
to attend on behalf of the citizens at a
parliament to be held at York, on Sunday next after
the Feast of the Purification (2 Feb., 1328). Instead,
however, of sending only two members as directed,
the citizens appear on this occasion to have sent no<pb n="174" /><anchor id="Pg174" />
less than four, viz.: Richard de Betoyne, Robert de
Kelseye, John de Grantham, and John Priour the
Younger.<note place="foot"><p>Return to writ, dated 12 January, 1 Edward III (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1327-8).&mdash;Pleas
and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. 20.</p></note></p>

<p>One of the questions to be determined was the
advisability of again removing the Staple from
England to the continent. On this question, there
appears to have arisen some difference of opinion
among the city representatives. Betoyne, who had
formerly enjoyed the office of Mayor of the Staple
beyond the seas, favoured a return to the old order of
things, whilst his colleagues were opposed to any
such proceeding. Notification of Betoyne's disagreement
with his colleagues was made to the mayor and
commonalty of the City by letter from the mayor
and commonalty of York, to which reply was made
that Betoyne's action was entirely unauthorised.<note place="foot"><p>Letter from the Mayor, &amp;c., of York, to the City of London,
dated 29 January, and reply.&mdash;Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr.
xix (23).</p></note> A
letter was sent the same day to Betoyne himself,
enjoining him to do nothing in the matter opposed
to the wish of the commonalty of London<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id. ibid.</hi></p></note>; and
another to Betoyne's colleagues informing them of
the City's action, and bidding them to exert themselves
to the utmost to keep the Staple in England.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 1, membr. xvii (20) dors. The letter was sent in
reply to one from the City's representatives, Grantham and Priour,
asking for instructions.</p></note></p>

<p>The account of Betoyne's difference with his
colleagues, as related in the letter from the City of
York, was subsequently found to require considerable
modification, when a letter was received by the Mayor
of London from two of his colleagues, Grantham<pb n="175" /><anchor id="Pg175" /><index index="toc" level1="RICHARD DE BETOYNE, MAYOR OF THE STAPLE." />
and Priour.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. xix (23) dors.</p></note> Their account of what had actually
taken place was to the effect that Betoyne had been
publicly requested by a number of representatives
from various towns, assembled in the Chapter House
at York, to resign his mayoralty (of the Staple) and
to deliver up the charters which had been acquired at
no little expense. Betoyne replied that the charters
were in the possession of John de Charleton,<note place="foot"><p>He had been an intimate favourite of Edward II. and had been
removed, with others, from that king's service in 1311. Notwithstanding
this, he appears as the king's Chamberlain in 1316. Ten
years later, when the city was in the hands of an infuriated mob, and
the king confined at Kenilworth, John de Charleton took the Earl of
Arundel prisoner and caused him to be beheaded. In 1329 the citizens
received peremptory orders from Edward III, not to harbour him in the
city.&mdash;Chron. Edward I &amp; II. i, 247.</p></note> who
refused to give them up, but that he had himself, four
years since, caused a transcript of the charters to be
made, which he was prepared to give up to them if
they so wished. Thereupon, there suddenly appeared
upon the scene the Mayor of York, hand in hand with
John de Charleton himself, and followed by a number
of burgesses of York. The appearance of John de
Charleton was eminently distasteful to Betoyne, and
he got up and left the room, declining to take any
further part in the discussion so long as Charleton was
present. That was practically all that had occurred,
and the writers expressed themselves as much hurt if
anything more than this had been reported from the
mayor and commonalty of York, for in their opinion
Betoyne had never shown himself otherwise than
diligent in his duty. The letter concluded with a
report of general news, the chief item being the
announcement of the death of the King of France, and
the writers expressed a wish that the same publicity<pb n="176" /><anchor id="Pg176" />
might be given to their letter as was given to the
letter received from the Mayor of York.</p>

<note place="margin">Betoyne's own account of his disagreement with his colleagues.</note>

<p>Betoyne on the same day sent home his own
account of what had taken place at York.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. 24.</p></note> It agrees
in the main with the account sent by his colleagues,
but contains some particulars of interest not mentioned
in the latter. He relates how he had been
asked to retire from the Mayoralty of the Staple
beyond the seas, and to give up the charters and other
muniments which the several towns had obtained at
considerable cost. To this he had replied that many
charters he had left behind on the continent, but he
had brought over with him the charters of the franchises
of the staples which had been purchased of the
late king. These were in the hands of John de
Charleton, who refused to give them up. He had
himself, however, gone to Dover in the eighteenth
year of Edward II, when the king himself was there,
and had caused a duplicate of the charters to be made,
which he had expressed his readiness to show them.
He encloses a copy. As a proof of the bad feeling
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">la malencolye</hi>) which the burgesses of York entertained
towards him, he proceeds to relate how the
Mayor of York, maliciously and without any warning,
had appeared at the assembly with four or five of his
suite, accompanied by John de Charleton, clothed in
the mayor's livery, and by a crowd of citizens, to
the terror of the assembled merchants. Thereupon,
Bretoyne had declared that he would not sit nor
remain where Charleton was, and had left the meeting;
for, said he, he would never make peace with
Charleton except with the assent of the Mayor and<pb n="177" /><anchor id="Pg177" /><index index="toc" level1="BETOYNE'S CONDUCT AT YORK APPROVED." />
Commonalty of London. He concluded by asking
that his character might not be allowed to suffer by
anything which the Mayor of York may have written.
By a postscript he informs the Mayor of London, that
on the eve of the Purification (the day fixed for the
re-assembly of parliament) the Mayor of York had
come to his hostel, accompanied by many others, and
had accused him of having come to the city for the
express purpose of annoying their fellow-burgess John
de Charleton, which he had denied. This insult, he
is advised, touches not only himself, but the Corporation
of London whose representative he was.</p>

<note place="margin">Betoyne's action approved by the citizens, 19 Feb., 1328.</note>

<p>Both these letters were laid before the commonalty
of London assembled at the Guildhall on the
19th February, when Betoyne's action was approved,
and on the following day a letter was addressed to
him to that effect. The Mayor and Commonalty of
York received also a missive in which their late conduct
to Betoyne was severely criticised.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1, membr. 24.</p></note> Betoyne's
recent services were recognized by the grant, at his
own request, of a handsome coverlet furred with
minever, in part payment of his expenses incurred in
attending the parliament at York.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book E, fo. 183. (Memorials, p. 169.)</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Temporary abolition of Staples. Aug., 1328.</note>

<p>The king, finding that the opposition to the removal
of the staple displayed not only by London
but by York, Winchester, Bristol and Lincoln was too
great to be overcome, abolished staples altogether
(August, 1328), and re-established free-trade.<note place="foot"><p>"In 1333 they were again established in England, but merchants
ignored them, and in the following year they were abolished.  From
1344 onwards they are frequently discussed in parliament and assemblies
of the merchants; and by the statute of 1353 the system was consolidated."&mdash;Stubbs,
Const. Hist., ii, 412.</p></note> He<pb n="178" /><anchor id="Pg178" />
even invited Flemish weavers to settle in England so
as to give a stimulus to the manufacture of woollen
fabrics. These he took under his special protection,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G. fos. 35b, 76.</p></note>
for the native looked askance upon all foreigners,
traders or craftsmen.</p>

<note place="margin">England and France, 1329-1331</note>

<p>One of the last political acts of Mortimer had
been to send Edward over to France to do homage to
Philip of Valois, the new king, for his possessions in
that country. This homage Edward paid in 1329,
but subject to certain reservations.<note place="foot"><p>Rymer's Fœdera (1821), vol. ii, pt. ii. p. 765.</p></note> In 1330 he
was making preparations for war, and took the
opportunity of the presence of Stephen de Abyndone
and John de Caustone, the City's representatives in
the parliament held that year at Westminster, to ask
them what assistance the City would be likely to
afford him. The City members asked leave to consult
the commonalty on the matter. Eventually the
sum of 1,000 marks was offered, a sum so trifling
that Edward consented to accept it only as a free
gift, and plainly intimated that he looked for more
substantial aid in the future.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 247, 249.</p></note></p>

<p>In July, he summoned the mayor and twenty-four
of the leading citizens to attend him at Woodstock.
The mayor (Simon de Swanlonde) would
have had them excused on the ground of the disturbed
state of the city, but the king was not to be denied.
Substitutes were appointed for the mayor during his
absence, and he and seven aldermen and sixteen
commoners went to Woodstock, where they gave<pb n="179" /><anchor id="Pg179" /><index index="toc" level1="EXPIRATION OF TREATY OF NORTHAMPTON." />
assurances of the City's loyalty.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II. i, 249, 251.</p></note> In 1331, after
Mortimer's fall, when Edward was his own master,
lie again visited France, and a peace was concluded
between the two kings.<note place="foot"><p>Rymer's Fœdera (1821), vol. ii, pt. ii, p. 815.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The war with Scotland, 1332-1335.</note>

<p>From 1332 to 1335 the king was chiefly occupied
with Scotland. It was part of the policy of Philip of
Valois to encourage disturbance in the north of
England, as a means of recovering his lost possessions
in France.<note place="foot"><p>Rex Franciæ subtiliavit viis et modis quibus potuit qualiter deturbaret
regem Angliæ et repatriare faceret ne tantum destrueret et debellaret
regnum Scotiæ.&mdash;Knighton (Rolls Series No. 76), i, 476.</p></note> The period of four years during which
peace had been assured by Edward with Scotland by
the treaty of Northampton had now elapsed,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, i, 461.</p></note> and
active operations on both sides re-commenced. In
1334 the city voted 1,000 marks, afterwards raised to
1,200, for raising 100 horsemen and as many men-at-arms
to assist the king for a period of forty days.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book E, fos. 1-4&mdash;(Memorials, pp. 187-190).</p></note></p>

<p>A spy was also despatched to Normandy and
Brabant to see how matters were going there, and
gifts were made to the courts of Juliers and Namur
to secure their favour. The parliament which sat at
York in May, 1335,<note place="foot"><p>John de Grantham was allowed 60 shillings for a horse which he
lost whilst going to this parliament on the city's business. (Letter Book
F, fo. 9b.) It is, however, not clear that Grantham attended the
parliament as a city member.</p></note> having decided in favour of a
fresh expedition to Scotland,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, ii. 122.</p></note> the king sent orders
to the City to hold its forces in readiness to march
under the leadership of two of its aldermen, John de<pb n="180" /><anchor id="Pg180" />
Pulteney and Reginald de Conduit.<note place="foot"><p>Letter patent, dated 12 August.&mdash;Pleas and Mem., Roll A 1,
membr. 35.</p></note> A commission
to seize ships in the port of London to the king's use,
resulted in the detention of six ships.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id. ibid.</hi></p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Preparations for war with France, 1337.</note>

<p>At length, the friendly attitude which Philip of
Valois had taken up towards Scotland, much to
Edward's prejudice, determined the latter to go in
person to France for the purpose, not only of defending
his possessions there, but also of enforcing his
claim to the French crown. The year 1337 was devoted
to active preparations for the struggle. The
City of London, in spite of its franchise, was called
upon to furnish 500 men at arms, and to send them
to Portsmouth by Whitsuntide.<note place="foot"><p>Letter patent, dated Westm., 24 March.&mdash;Letter Book F., fo. 6.</p></note> The date was subsequently
altered to Trinity Sunday.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 6b.</p></note> The king took
occasion to find fault with the city's dilatoriness in
executing his demands, as well as with the physique
of the men that were being supplied. At the request
of the mayor, Sir John de Pulteney (he had recently
received the honour of knighthood<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, i, 366.</p></note>), the number of
men to be furnished was reduced to 200, the rest to
be supplied on further notice.<note place="foot"><p>The king's letter, dated Stamford, 1 June, 1337.&mdash;Letter Book F,
fo. 6b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Charter, 26 March, 1337.</note>

<p>When Parliament met in London in February,
the City made presents of money to the king, the
queen, the chancellor, the treasurer, and others,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 4-5.</p></note> for
no other purpose apparently, but to win their favour.
In the following month the City obtained a charter<pb n="181" /><anchor id="Pg181" /><index index="toc" level1="THE KING'S MONOPOLY OF WOOL." />
declaring its liberties and customs to be unaffected
by the recent statute establishing free trade,<note place="foot"><p>Charter dated Westminster, 26 March, 1337, preserved at the
Guildhall (Box No. 5). The king made frequent attempts to annul
this charter.&mdash;Letter Book F, fo. 197; Letter Book G, fos. 11b, 41b.</p></note> when
presents in money or kind were again made to the
officers of state.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 9.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The services of John de Pulteney, Mayor.</note>

<p>The services which the mayor had done the city
in the work of obtaining this charter were acknowledged
by a gift of two silver basins and the sum of
£20 from his fellow citizens.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 9b.  (Memorials, p. 197).</p></note> It was by Pulteney's
influence that the king consented to allow a sum of
1,000 marks to be taken into account at a future
assessment for a fifteenth, instead of insisting upon its
being a free gift from the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 10b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king monopolises the wool of the country.</note>

<p>In March, 1337, a statute forbade the importation
of wool, as a preliminary to the imposition of an
additional custom, and in the following year parliament
granted the king half the wool of the kingdom.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., ii, 380.</p></note>
The Londoners having no wool of their own, paid a
composition,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 42.</p></note> and were often reduced to sore straits.
Thus in April, 1339, an assessment had to be made in
the several wards of the City to discharge a debt to
the king of 1,000 marks. The men of Aldersgate
ward refused to pay their quota of £9. A precept
was thereupon issued to the sheriffs to levy the larger
sum of £16 10s., on the lands, tenements, goods, and
chattels of the ward, and pay the same into the
Chamber of the Guildhall by a certain day.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 3 and 3 dors.</p></note> The
citizens of London, and the nation generally, would<pb n="182" /><anchor id="Pg182" />
the more willingly have borne these exactions if any
adequate good had resulted from them. But Edward's
first campaign resulted in nothing more than the
assumption by him of the name and arms of the
King of France, at a cost of £300,000.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., ii, 380-381.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Naval and military preparations in the City.</note>

<p>Among the ships which had been prepared for
the king's expedition to France, three were known as
"La Jonette," of London; "La Cogge," of All
Hallows; and "La Sainte Marie Cogge." The last
mentioned belonged to William Haunsard,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 3, 3b.</p></note> an ex-sheriff
of London, who subsequently did signal service
in the great naval battle of Sluys. Prior to the
king's departure, measures were taken for the safe
custody of the city during his absence.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 14b. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 18b.</p></note> The City had
difficulties in raising a contingent of soldiers, for many
of the best men had joined the retinue of nobles, and
all that could be mustered amounted to no more than
100 men, viz: 40 men-at-arms, and 60 archers.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 5, membr. 3 dors.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city put into a posture of defence after the king's departure, July, 1338.</note>

<p>After the king's departure (12 July, 1338) the
City laid in provisions for transmission abroad, 500
quarters of corn and 100 carcases of oxen to be salted
down. In addition to which it purchased 1,000 horseshoes
and 30,000 nails.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, membr. 5 dors.</p></note> In October steps were taken
to protect London from attack by sea and land.
Piles were driven into the bed of the river to prevent
the approach of a hostile fleet; the wharves were
"bretasched" with boards, and springalds set at
different gates and posterns.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, membr. 6. On the 23 October, the Duke of Cornwall,
whom the king had nominated regent during his absence abroad, wrote
to the Mayor, &amp;c., of London, bidding him put the city into a posture
of defence.&mdash;Letter Book F, fo. 19.</p></note></p>

<pb n="183" /><anchor id="Pg183" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY PREPARES TO DEFEND ITSELF." />

<note place="margin"> Orders for city to provide more ships and men, Feb., 1339.</note>

<p>In February, 1339, the citizens received the king's
orders to furnish four ships with 300 men, and four
scummars<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Skumarii</hi>: a scummar, a rover. Skeats' Glossary to the Bruce
(Early Eng. Text Soc. <hi rend="font-style: italic">s. v.</hi>)</p></note> with 160 men, victualled for three months,
to proceed to Winchester. Upon some demur being
made to this demand, the number of ships was reduced
to two, well equipped with men and arms. Pursuant
to these orders each ward was assessed for the purpose
of levying 110 men armed with haketon, plates,
bacinet with aventail, and gloves of plate; and sixty
men armed with only haketon and bacinet. The pay
of the men was to be threepence a day each for two
months. The vessels were to be joined by ships from
various other ports, and proceed to sea in charge of Sir
William Trussel by the middle of March to intercept,
if possible, the enemy's fleet.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 22b-23.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin"> A threatened invasion up the Thames, Easter, 1339.</note>

<p>By Easter time the danger appeared more imminent,
and the mayor and aldermen met hurriedly in the
Guildhall, on Easter Sunday afternoon after dinner.
An immediate attack up the Thames was expected.
The mayor and aldermen agreed to take it in turns
to watch the river night and day. On the following
Wednesday, each alderman was ordered to enquire
as to the number of arbalesters, archers, and men
capable of bearing arms in his ward. A number of
carpenters were sworn on the same day to safe-guard
the engines of war laid up in the new house near
Petywales.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 1.</p></note> This new house appears to have been
known as "La Bretaske," and was used for storing
springalds, quarels, and other war material.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fly leaf. (Memorials, p. 204.)</p></note></p>

<pb n="184" /><anchor id="Pg184" />

<note place="margin"> Implements of war stored at the Guildhall.</note>

<p>At this period there were kept in the chamber
of the Guildhall six instruments called "gonnes,"
which were made of latten, a metal closely resembling
brass, five "teleres" or stocks for supporting
the guns, four cwt. and a half of pellets of lead, and
thirty-two pounds of gunpowder by way of ammunition.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fly-leaf. The passage was printed by the late
Mr. Riley, although somewhat inaccurately, in his Memorials (p. 205).
The original MS. runs thus: "Item in Camera Gildaule sunt sex Instrumenta
de Laton vocata Gonnes cum quinque teleres ad eadem.
Item pelete de plumbo pro eidem Instrumentis que ponderant iiij<hi rend="vertical-align: super">c</hi> li et
dj. Item xxxij li de pulvere pro dictis instrumentis."</p></note>
The mention of "teleres" and the small
amount of ammunition favours the assumption that the
instruments were rather hand-guns than heavy pieces,
as has been supposed.<note place="foot"><p>The late Mr. Riley misread "roleres" for "teleres" (the writing
is not very legible), and therefore thought the passage referred to heavy
ordnance.</p></note> A "telere" or tiller was a
common name for the stock of a cross-bow,<note place="foot"><p>Richard Hastinges bequeaths by will in 1558 his bows and arrows,
with "tyllers" &amp;c.&mdash;Calendar of Wills, Court of Hust., London, ii,
670.</p></note> and the
earliest hand-guns or fire-arms known consisted of a
simple tube of metal with touch-hole, fixed on a
straight stick or shaft, which when used was passed
under the arm so as to afford a better grip of the
weapon.</p>

<note place="margin"> The king's return, Feb., 1340.</note>

<p>The danger blew over, and before the close of the
year the king was expected to return to England.<note place="foot"><p>Congregacio Maioris Aldermannorum et unius hominis cujuslibet
warde civitatis pro negociis communitatem tangentibus die veneris
proxima post festum Sancte Katerine Virginis (25 Nov.) anno xiij<hi rend="vertical-align: super">c</hi>
contra adventum domini regis et regine de partibus transmarinis.&mdash;Pleas
and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 10.</p></note>
He did not return however before February, 1340,
having intimated his intention to the mayor of London,
by letter from Sluys, dated Sunday the 20th.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 30b.</p></note><pb n="185" /><anchor id="Pg185" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BATTLE OF SLUYS." />
Notwithstanding his long absence, he had accomplished
little or nothing.</p>

<note place="margin">A City loan of £5,000.</note>

<p>He had come to the end of his resources and was
in want of money to carry on the war. The City was
asked to lend him £20,000. It offered 5,000 marks.
This was contemptuously refused, and the municipal
authorities were bidden to re-consider the matter, or
in the alternative to furnish the king with the names
of the wealthier inhabitants of the City. At length
the City agreed to advance the sum of £5,000 for a
fixed period, and this offer the king was fain to accept.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 32b. (Memorials, pp. 208-210.)</p></note>
At the close of 1339, the chief towns of Flanders had
entered into an offensive and defensive alliance with
Edward, and an arrangement was made for paying
the sum of £1,500 out of the £5,000 to Jacques van
Arteveldt, the king's agent at Bruges.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 12 dors.</p></note> Three aldermen
and nine commoners were appointed to make
the necessary assessment for the loan, for the repayment
of which John de Pulteney was one of the king's
sureties.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 34b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king again sets sail, June, 1340.</note>

<p>Provided with this and other money supplied by
parliament, Edward again set out for the continent
(June, 1340). With him went a contingent of 283
men-at-arms, furnished by the City, 140 of them being
drawn from that part of the city which lay on the
east side of Walbrook, and 143 from the western side.
It had been intended to raise 300 men, and the better
class of citizens had been called upon to supply each
a quota, or in default to serve in person; but eleven
had failed in their duty and, on that account, had<pb n="186" /><anchor id="Pg186" />
been fined 50 shillings each, whilst six others, making
up the deficit, had set out in the retinue of Henry
Darcy, the late mayor.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 39.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The battle of Sluys, 24 June, 1340.</note>

<p>The names of the transport ships and the number
of men-at-arms supplied by each city, the number
of mariners and serving-men (<hi rend="font-style: italic">garzouns</hi>), which were
about to take part in the great battle fought off Sluys
(24 June), are on record.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 20-21. Letter Book F, fo. 37b.</p></note> Although the French fleet
was superior to his own in numbers and equipment,
Edward did not hesitate to attack. The struggle was
long and severe, lasting from noon on one day until
six o'clock the next morning. If any one person was
more conspicuous for valour on that occasion than
another, it was William Haunsard, an ex-sheriff of
London, who came with "a ship of London" and
"did much good."<note place="foot"><p>A cedula inserted between membranes 19 and 20 of Pleas and
Mem., Roll A 3.</p></note></p>

<p>An account of the battle was despatched by the
king to his son the Prince Regent, dated from
his ship, the "Cogg Thomas," the 28th June.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier, Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), 277.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="187" /><anchor id="Pg187" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VIII.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="THE KING'S UNEXPECTED RETURN, 30 NOV., 1340." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">The king's unexpected return, 30 Nov., 1340.</note>

<p>It was one of the conditions of the Flemish
alliance, mentioned at the close of the last chapter,
that the campaign of 1340 should open with the siege
of Tournay, and it was with this object specially in
view that Edward had set out from England. After
his brilliant victory over the French fleet which
opposed his passage Edward marched upon Tournay.
Its siege, however, proved fruitless, and, disappointed
and money-less, he slipt back again to England and
made his appearance unexpectedly one morning at
the Tower<note place="foot"><p>Murimuth, Contin. Chron. (Rolls Series No. 93), p. 116. Avesbury
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid</hi>), p. 323.</p></note> (30 Nov.).</p>

<note place="margin">Dismisses ministers and orders an enquiry as to collection of revenue.</note>

<note place="margin">The justices at the Tower, March-April. 1341.</note>

<p>The king attributed the failure of the war to the
remissness of his ministers in sending money and
supplies. Scarcely had he landed before he sent for
the chancellor, the treasurer, and other ministers who
were in London, and not only dismissed them from
office, but ordered them each into separate confinement.
John de Pulteney was one of those made to
feel the king's anger, and he was relegated to the
castle of Somerton, but as soon as Edward's irritability
had passed off he and others obtained their freedom.<note place="foot"><p>Aungier's Fr. Chron. (Riley's transl.), pp. 283-285. Murimuth,
p. 117.</p></note>
A searching enquiry was instituted in the spring of<pb n="188" /><anchor id="Pg188" />
the following year (1341) as to the way in which the
king's revenues had been collected in the city.
Objection was raised to the judges holding their
session within the city and they sat at the Tower.
Great tumult prevailed, and the citizens refused to
answer any questions until the judges had formally
acknowledged the City's liberties. A special fund was
raised for the purpose of defending the City's rights.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 22.</p></note>
From the 5th March to the 17th March the justices
sat, and then an adjournment was made until the
16th April. On resumption of the session another
adjournment immediately took place owing to parliament
sitting at Westminster, and when the judges
should have again sat, the Iter was suddenly determined
by order of the king.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 45b-49. Murimuth, pp. 118, 119.</p></note> The king showed much
annoyance at the attitude taken up by the citizens,
or at least by a certain portion of them, with respect
to this enquiry, and endeavoured to procure the names
of the ringleaders.<note place="foot"><p>Murimuth, p. 119.</p></note> Failing in this, and not wishing
to make an enemy of the city on which he largely
depended for resources to carry out his military
measures, he bestowed a general pardon on the citizens,
and promised that no Iter should be held at the
Tower for a period of seven years.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 49.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Charter to the city, dated 26 March, 1341.</note>

<p>As a further mark of favour he granted to the
City, soon after the abrupt termination of the Iter, a
charter confirming previous charters; allowing the
citizens in express terms to vary customs that might
in course of time have become incapable of being put<pb n="189" /><anchor id="Pg189" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY'S RIGHT TO VARY CUSTOMS." />
into practice, and declaring the city's liberties not
subject to forfeiture through non-user.<note place="foot"><p>Dated 26 May, 1341.  This charter, which was granted with
the assent of parliament, is preserved at the Guildhall (Box No. 5.)</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city called upon to furnish the king with 26 ships.</note>

<p>In August (1341) the citizens met to consider the
question of levying a sum of £2,000, of which 2,000
marks was due to certain citizens in part payment of
the £5,000 lent to the king, and 1,000 marks was
required for the discharge of the city's own debts. A
certain number of aldermen and commoners were at
the same time appointed to confer with the king's
council touching the sending of ships of war beyond
the seas. The result of the interview was made
known to the citizens at a meeting held later on in
the same month. A further grievous burden (<hi rend="font-style: italic">vehemens
onus</hi>) was to be laid upon them; they were
called upon to provide no less than twenty-six ships,
fully equipped and victualled at their own cost.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 3, membr. 25 dors.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's expedition to Brittany, Oct., 1342.</note>

<p>The ships were probably wanted for conveying
forces over to Brittany under the command of Sir
Walter de Maunay, in the following year. The king
himself made an expedition to that country in October,
1342, having previously succeeded in borrowing
the sum of £1,000 from the citizens. He had asked
for £2,000, but was fain to be content with the lesser
sum, security for repayment of which was demanded
and granted.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Roll A 5.
membr. 17.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A truce with France for three years.</note>

<p>In March, 1343, Edward returned to England,
having made a truce with France for three years.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., ii, 392 note. Aungier's Fr. Chron. (Riley's
transl.), 290.</p></note>
He was beginning to learn the value of the English<pb n="190" /><anchor id="Pg190" />
longbow and the cloth-yard shaft in the field of
battle. Hitherto he, like others before him, had
placed too much reliance on charges by knights on
horseback. What the longbow could effect, under
proper management, had been experienced at Falkirk
in 1298. It had proved a failure at Bannockburn in
1314 through bad strategy, but at Halidon Hill twenty
years later (1333) it was again effective. It was destined
soon to work a complete reform in English
warfare; and the yeoman and archer were to supersede
the noble and knight. The London burgess and
apprentice were especially apt with the weapon from
constant practice in Finsbury fields. Edward realised
the necessity of fostering the martial spirit of the
Londoners, and on one occasion (January, 1344)
invited the wives of the burgesses to witness a tournament
at Windsor, where they were entertained right
royally.<note place="foot"><p>Murimuth, 155.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Renewal of the war in 1345.</note>

<p>Before the expiration of the truce Edward was
busy with preparations for a renewal of the war.
Four hundred London archers were to be got ready by
Midsummer of 1344, as the king was soon to cross the
sea; and 100 men-at-arms and 200 horsemen were to
be despatched to Portsmouth.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 81-84b.</p></note> In 1345, a royal commission
was issued for the seizure for the king's use
of all vessels lying in the river.<note place="foot"><p>Commission, dated Windsor, 20th March, 1345. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> fo. 98b.</p></note> A further contingent
of 160 archers was ordered to Sandwich by Whitsuntide,
and in August the city received another order for
yet more archers.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> fos. 99, 109, 110.</p></note> In September, the king informed
the mayor by letter that, owing to the defective<pb n="191" /><anchor id="Pg191" /><index index="toc" level1="EDWARD AGAIN SETS SAIL FOR FRANCE." />
state of his fleet and the prevalence of contrary
winds, he had postponed setting sail for a short time;
the civic authorities were to keep their men-at-arms
and archers ready to set out the morrow after the
receipt of orders to march.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 111.</p></note> Six months elapsed,
during which the citizens were kept under arms waiting
for orders, when, on the 18th March, 1346, another
letter was sent by the king to the effect that he had
now fully made up his mind to set sail from Portsmouth
a fortnight after Easter. The men-at-arms, the horsemen,
and the archers, were to be ready by a certain
day on pain of losing life, limb, and property. On the
28th March, the archers mustered in "Totehull" or
Tothill Fields, near Westminster.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 116b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Expedition to France sets sail, 10 July, 1346.</note>

<p>The expedition did not actually sail from Portsmouth
until the 10th July, the fleet numbering 1,000
vessels more or less.<note place="foot"><p>Murimuth (Rolls Series, No. 93, p. 198) states that the number
of vessels great and small amounted to 750; whilst in another Chronicle
the same writer says that they numbered more than 1,500 (Chron. ed.
for Eng. Hist. Soc., p. 164.)</p></note> Previous to his departure,
Edward caused proclamation to be made in the city
and elsewhere, to the effect that the assessments
that had been made throughout the country for the
purpose of equipping the expedition, should not be
drawn into precedent.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F. fo. 119. Murimuth (Rolls Series), p. 198.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">News of the king's arrival and success in Normandy, 3 Aug.</note>

<p>On the 3rd August the regent forwarded to the
city a copy of a letter he had received from the king,
giving an account of his passage to Normandy and
of the capture of various towns, and among them of
Caen. There he had discovered a document of no
little importance.  This was none other than an<pb n="192" /><anchor id="Pg192" />
agreement made in 1338, whereby Normandy had
bound itself to assist the king of France in his proposed
invasion and conquest of England.<note place="foot"><p>Murimuth (Rolls Series), pp. 205-211.</p></note> This
document the king transmitted to England by the
hands of the Earl of Huntingdon, who was returning
invalided, and it was publicly read in St. Paul's
Churchyard, with the view of stirring the citizens to
fresh exertions in prosecuting the war. The king's
own letter was also publicly read in the Husting by
the regent's order.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 120b.</p></note> The City was exhorted to have
in readiness a force to succour the king, if need be.
Every effort was made to raise money, and the regent
did not hesitate to resort to depreciation of the coinage
of the realm in order to help his father. The City
made a free gift to the king of 1,000 marks and lent
him 2,000 more.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 121-125b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The battle of Creçy, 26 Aug., 1346.</note>

<p>On the 26th August the battle of Creçy was won
against a force far outnumbering the English army.
The victory was due in large measure to the superiority
of the English longbow over the crossbow used
by the Genoese mercenaries; but it was also a victory
of foot soldiers over horsemen. The field of Bannockburn
had shown how easy a thing it was for a body
of horsemen to crush a body of archers, if allowed to
take them in the flank, whilst that of Halidon Hill
had more recently taught the king, from personal
experience, that archers could turn the tide of battle
against any direct attack, however violent. Edward
profited by the experience of that day. He not only
protected the flank of his archers, but interspersed
among them dismounted horsemen with levelled<pb n="193" /><anchor id="Pg193" /><index index="toc" level1="SURRENDER OF CALAIS." />
spears, the result being that the French were driven
off the field with terrible slaughter.</p>

<note place="margin">Siege and surrender of Calais, 1346-1347.</note>

<p>Flushed with victory Edward proceeded to lay
siege to Calais. His forces, which had been already
greatly reduced on the field of Creçy, suffered a further
diminution by desertion. The mayor and sheriffs of
London were ordered to seize all deserters, whether
knights, esquires, or men of lower order, found in
the city, and to take steps for furnishing the king
with fresh recruits and store of victuals.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 127, 127b, 130.</p></note> By Easter
of the following year, the City was called upon to
furnish two vessels towards a fleet of 120 large ships,
which the council had decided to fit out. All ships
found in the port of London were pressed into the
king's service.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 132b-133b.</p></note></p>

<p>In July (1347) the king was in need of more
recruits and provisions.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 139, 140.</p></note> Calais still held out, although
both besiegers and besieged were reduced to sore
straits. At last it surrendered (4 Aug.). Edward
spared the lives of its principal burgesses at the intercession
of his queen, but he cleared the town of
French inhabitants, and invited Londoners and others
to take up their abode there, offering them houses at
low rents and other inducements.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 140 b.</p></note> A truce with
Philip was agreed on, and Edward returned home.
For a time England was resplendent with the spoils
of the French war&mdash;"A new sun seemed to shine,"
wrote Walsingham.<note place="foot"><p>Hist. Angl. (Rolls Series No. 28), i, 272.  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Chron. Angliæ
(Rolls Series No. 64). p. 26.</p></note> Every woman of position went
gaily decked with some portion of the plunder of the<pb n="194" /><anchor id="Pg194" />
town of Caen or Calais; cupboards shone with silver
plate, and wardrobes were filled with foreign furs and
rich drapery of continental workmanship. The golden
era was of short duration.</p>

<note place="margin">The Black Death, 1348-1349.</note>

<p>In August, 1348, the pestilential scourge, known
as the Black Death,<note place="foot"><p>It was the first of the three pestilences (the others occurring in
1361 and 1369) which served occasionally as land marks in history for
dating conveyances and other records.&mdash;See Bond's Handy-book for
verifying dates, p. 311.</p></note> appeared in England, and reached
London in the following November. The number of
victims it carried off in the city has been variously
computed,<note place="foot"><p>Stow extravagantly conjectures that no less than 50,000 perished
within a year, all of whom were buried in Walter Manny's cemetery,
near the Charterhouse. Another chronicler states that 200 were buried
there alone between February and April, 1349.&mdash;Avesbury (Rolls
Series No. 93), p. 407.</p></note> but all conjectures of the kind must be
received with caution. All that is known for certain
is that the mortality caused a marked increase in the
number of beggars, and, at the same time, raised the
price of labour and provisions within the city's walls
to such a degree that measures had to be taken to
remedy both evils.<note place="foot"><p>Whilst the king forbade the encouragement of beggars by gifts
of charity, the municipal authorities fixed the price of labour.&mdash;Letter
Book F. fos. 163, 168, 169, 181. At the close of the year (1349)
a statute&mdash;known as the Statute of Labourers&mdash;was passed, fixing the
scale of wages at the rate prevalent before the Black Death, and ordering
punishment to be inflicted on those who demanded more.</p></note> Besides the losses by death, the
population of the city and the country generally was
sensibly diminished by the flight of numbers of inhabitants
to the continent, with the hope of escaping
the ravages of the plague. The king's treasury
threatened soon to become empty, and the country
left defenceless, if this were allowed to go on unchecked;
he therefore ordered the sheriffs of London
to see that no men-at-arms, strangers or otherwise, left<pb n="195" /><anchor id="Pg195" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BLACK DEATH." />
the kingdom, with the exception of well-known merchants
or ambassadors, without the king's special
order.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fo. 168.</p></note> Pilgrimages to Rome or elsewhere were made
an excuse for leaving England, at a time when the
king's subjects could ill be spared. The king endeavoured
to limit this drain upon the population of
the kingdom by allowing none to cross the sea
without his special licence. The city authorities having
negligently executed his orders in this respect, received
a rebuke in October, 1350, and were told to be more
strict in their observance for the future.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 191b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A fresh truce with France, commencing 13 June, 1350.</note>

<p>On the night which ushered in New Year's day,
1350, an abortive attempt had been made by the
French to recapture Calais. This ill success rendered
Philip the more willing to agree to a further prolongation
of the truce with England. Notification of this
cessation of hostilities was duly sent to the sheriffs of
London.<note place="foot"><p>By writ, dated 1 July. Letter Book F, fo. 185b.</p></note> Before the truce had come to an end
Philip of Valois had ceased to live, and had been succeeded
on the throne of France by John II.</p>

<note place="margin">Measures taken for the suppression of piracy, July, 1350.</note>

<p>The city had scarcely recovered from the ravages
of the late pestilence, before it was called upon (24
July, 1350) to furnish two ships to assist the king
in putting down piracy. These were accordingly
fitted out; the ship of Andrew Turk being furnished
with 40 men-at-arms and 60 archers, whilst that of
Goscelin de Cleve had on board 30 men-at-arms and
40 archers.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 187b, 188b.</p></note> With their aid, Edward succeeded in
utterly defeating a Spanish fleet which had recently
inflicted much damage on the Bordeaux wine fleet,<pb n="196" /><anchor id="Pg196" />
and capturing 24 large ships laden with rich merchandise.<note place="foot"><p>Avesbury (Rolls Series No. 93), p. 412.</p></note>
The citizens had further to submit to a
tax on wool and wine, in order to maintain the king's
vessels engaged in putting down piracy.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book F, fos. 174, 176.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Charter relative to the City's gold mace, 10 June, 1354.</note>

<p>In 1354 an exception was made by special
charter of the king in favour of the City of London,
and its sergeants were permitted to carry maces of
gold or silver, or plated with silver, and bearing the
royal arms. Ten years before the commons of
England had petitioned the king (<hi rend="font-style: italic">inter alia</hi>) not to
allow any one to carry maces tipped with silver in
city or borough, except the king's own officers. All
others were to carry maces tipped with copper only
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">virolez de cuevere</hi>), with staves of wood as formerly.
The petition was granted saving that the sergeants
of the City of London might carry their mace within
the liberties of the city and before the mayor in the
king's presence.<note place="foot"><p>Rot. Parl., ii, 155.</p></note> This same year (1354), moreover,
the king with the assent of parliament had again
forbidden the carrying of gold or silver maces.
Thenceforth, maces were to be of iron, brass or
tin, or staves tipped with latten, and not to bear
representations of the royal arms, but the arms or
signs of the city using them. Again exception was
made in the case of London; two sergeants of the
City as well as of the City of York being permitted to
carry gold or silver maces, but they were not to be
surmounted with the royal arms. This led to a
humble remonstrance from the whole body of the
citizens of London, presented to the chancellor and<pb n="197" /><anchor id="Pg197" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BATTLE OF POITIERS." />
the council by their mayor, Adam Fraunceys, and
within a month the charter above mentioned was
granted. That the charter originated or authorized
the title of "Lord" Mayor, as some have supposed,
is extremely improbable.</p>

<note place="margin">Renewal of war with France, 1355.</note>

<p>In 1355, all efforts to convert the truce into a
final peace having failed, war with France was renewed.
Edward was soon called home by fresh
troubles in Scotland. Having recovered Berwick,
which had been taken by surprise, and formally received
the crown of Scotland from Edward Baliol, he
prepared to rejoin his son, the Black Prince, in France,
and in March, 1356, ordered the city to furnish him
with two vessels of war.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 47.&mdash;Their cost, amounting to nearly £500, was
assessed on the wards.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Battle of Poitiers, 19 Sept., 1356</note>

<p>News of the battle of Poitiers (19 September,
1356), and of the defeat and capture of the French
king, was received in the city by letter from the
Prince of Wales, dated 22nd October.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 53b. (Memorials, pp. 285-289).</p></note> Again the
English longbow, combined with superior tactics,
gained the day. The prince, on his return, made a
triumphal entry into the city, passing over London
Bridge on his way to Westminster, with the captive
king and the king's son in his train.<note place="foot"><p>Walshingham (Rolls Series No. 28), i, 283. Chron. Angliæ
(Rolls Series No. 64), p. 37.</p></note> The streets
were almost impassable for the multitude that
thronged them; and for the moment the citizens forgot
at what cost to themselves the victory had been
gained. A truce&mdash;a welcome truce&mdash;for two years
followed.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fos. 65-67.</p></note></p>

<pb n="198" /><anchor id="Pg198" />

<note place="margin">Grievances of the city laid before the king.</note>

<p>Only a few weeks before the prince's return the
citizens had laid before the king a list of their
grievances and prayed for redress.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 60.</p></note> They had complained
of being charged taxes and talliages in excess
of any other of the commons. They had lent the
king at Dordrecht no less a sum than £60,000, and
had incurred further loss by the discrepancy between
the weight for weighing wool at Dordrecht and that
of England. They had lent the king further sums of
£5,000 and £2,000 on two separate occasions, which
had not been repaid. The sum of £40,000 had been
advanced to the king's merchants at Calais and elsewhere,
and this, together with other sums lent
(amounting to over £30,000), was still outstanding to
the grievous hurt of many citizens. They had, moreover,
been called upon to undergo more charges than
others with respect to the king's expeditions to Scotland,
Flanders and France, and in providing men-at-arms,
archers and ships, in aid of his wars. Nor did
their complaints stop here. The king's purveyors had
been accustomed to seize the carriages, victuals and
merchandise of citizens without offering payment for
the same, in direct contravention of the king's first
charter to the city. Owing, moreover, to deaths by
the plague, so much property had come into mortmain
that the city had become impoverished, and
one-third part of it rendered void of inhabitants.
These points they had desired the king to consider,
inasmuch as the city had always been loyal and peaceful,
setting an example to the whole country. The
petition wound up with the usual complaint against
the privileges allowed foreign merchants, and a request<pb n="199" /><anchor id="Pg199" /><index index="toc" level1="THE PEACE OF BRETIGNY." />
that the king would grant them letters patent under
the great seal, such as they might show to the purveyors
whenever they attempted to take anything
without payment.<note place="foot"><p>Relief on this point was afforded by the king in February, 1359,
by the issue of a writ to the effect that the names of his purveyors
should be handed to the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, and that the
purveyors shall not seize any victuals until they had shown and read
their commission.&mdash;Letter Book G, fo. 74.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward's last invasion of France, 1359-1360.</note>

<p>After the expiration of the truce Edward again
set out for France. That country, however, had
suffered so much during the last two years at the
hands of freebooters, that Edward experienced the
greatest difficulty in finding sufficient provisions for
his army. Whilst he was traversing France in search
of a force with which to try conclusions in the field,
a Norman fleet swept down upon the south coast and
sacked Winchelsea. The news of this disaster so
incensed the king that he determined to march direct
on Paris. The Londoners, in the meantime, assisted
in fitting out a fleet of eighty vessels, manned with
14,000 men, including archers, in order to wipe out
this disgrace, but the enemy contrived to make good
their escape.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, i, 288.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The peace of Bretigny, 1360.</note>

<p>At length Edward was induced to accede to the
terms offered by France, and the peace of Bretigny
was concluded (8th May, 1360). The terms were
very favourable to England, although Edward consented
to abandon all claim to the French crown.
King John was to be ransomed, but the price set on
his release was so high that some years elapsed before
the money could be raised, and then only with the
assistance of a few of the livery companies of the city,<pb n="200" /><anchor id="Pg200" />
which showed their sympathy with the captured king
by contributing to the fund being raised for the purpose
of restoring him to liberty.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 133.</p></note> It was John's high
sense of honour that kept him in captivity in England
until his death in 1364. He had in fact been liberated
and allowed to return to France soon after the conclusion
of peace, on payment of part of his ransom,
hostages being accepted for payment of the remainder.
In 1363 one of the hostages broke his pledge and fled,
and John, shocked at such perfidy, returned Regulus-like
to England. Hence it was that he appears as one
of the four kings whom Picard, the mayor, entertained
that same year at a banquet, followed by play at dice
and hazard.<note place="foot"><p>Stow's Survey (Thom's ed. 1876), pp. 41, 90.&mdash;If we include
David, King of Denmark (as some do), the number of kings entertained
on this occasion was five, and to this day the toast of "Prosperity to
the Vintners' Company" is drunk at their banquets with five cheers in
memory of the visit of the five crowned heads.&mdash;See a pamphlet entitled
<hi rend="font-style: italic">The Vintners' Company with Five</hi>, by B. Standring, Master of the
Company in 1887.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">England at peace, 1360-1369.</note>

<p>The citizens now enjoyed a period of leisure which
they were not slow to turn to account. The years
which followed the peace of Bretigny, until war broke
out afresh in 1369, witnessed the re-organisation of
many of the trade and craft guilds. Some of these,
like the Goldsmiths, the Tailors or Linen-Armourers,
and the Skinners, had already obtained charters from
Edward soon after his accession, so had also the Fishmongers,
although the earliest extant charter of the
company is dated 1363. The Vintners date their
chartered rights from the same year; the Drapers from
1364; whilst the more ancient company of Weavers
obtained a confirmation of their privileges in 1365.<pb n="201" /><anchor id="Pg201" /><index index="toc" level1="RENEWAL OF THE WAR WITH FRANCE." />
Minor guilds, like the Founders, the Plumbers, the
Fullers and others, had to content themselves with
the recognition of their ordinances by the civic
authorities alone between 1364 and 1369.</p>

<p>The king's favour was purchased in 1363 by a
gift of nearly £500, to which the livery companies
largely contributed.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 133.&mdash;The list of subscribers, as printed in
Herbert's Introduction to his History of the Twelve Great Livery
Companies (p. 32), is very inaccurately transcribed.</p></note> The amount of each subscription
varied from half-a-mark to £40, the latter sum being
contributed by the Mercers, the Fishmongers, the
Drapers, and the Skinners respectively. The Tailors
subscribed half that amount, being outdone by the
Vintners, who contributed £33 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi></p>

<note place="margin">The renewal of the war, 1369.</note>

<p>With the renewal of the war, a change comes over
the pages of the City's annals. The London bachelor
and apprentice is drawn off from his football and
hockey, with which he had beguiled his leisure hours,
and bidden to devote himself to the more useful pursuits
of shooting with arrow or bolt on high days and
holidays.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 158.</p></note> Once more we meet with schedules of
men-at-arms and archers provided by the City for
service abroad, and of assessments made on the City's
wards to pay for them.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 225b, 226b, 235b, 236b.</p></note> Every inducement in the
shape of plunder was held out to volunteers for enlistment,
and public proclamation was made to the effect
that the spoils of France should belong to the captors
themselves.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 228b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">City loans, 1370-1371.</note>

<p>It was an easier matter for the City to provide the
king with money than men. In 1370 it advanced a<pb n="202" /><anchor id="Pg202" />
sum of £5,000,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 247b.&mdash;The money was advanced on the
security of Exchequer bills. The names of the contributors and the
several sums contributed, covering three folios of the Letter Book, have
been for some reason erased.</p></note> and in the following year a further
sum of £4,000, and more was subscribed by the
wealthier citizens, among whom were William Walworth,
who contributed over £200, Adam Fraunceys,
Simon de Mordon, and others.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 263, 270.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">New form of taxation, 1371.</note>

<p>Still the expenses of the war exceeded the supply
of money, and resort was had to a new form of
taxation, by which it was hoped that a sum of
£50,000 might be realised. By order of parliament,
made in March, 1371, the sum of 22<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 3<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> was to be
levied on every parish in the kingdom, the number
of parishes being reckoned as amounting to 40,000.
It soon became apparent that the number of existing
parishes throughout the country had been grossly
miscalculated. There were not more than 9,000, and
the amount of assessment had to be proportionately
raised. It was necessary to summon a council at
Westminster in June, to remedy the miscalculation
that had been made in March. Half of the representatives
of the late parliament were summoned to meet
the king, and among them two of the city's members,
Bartholomew Frestlyng and John Philipot&mdash;"the
first Englishman who has left behind him the reputation
of a financier."<note place="foot"><p>Fasciculi Zizaniorum (Rolls Series No. 5), introd., p. xxviii.</p></note> The mistake was rectified,
the charge of 22<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 3<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> was raised to 116<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> and the city
was called upon to raise over £600.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fos. 274b-275.</p></note></p>

<p>In the meantime the civic authorities had, in
answer to the king's writ,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 268.</p></note> prepared a return of the<pb n="203" /><anchor id="Pg203" /><index index="toc" level1="ASSESSMENT ON CITY PARISHES." />
number of parish churches, chapels and prebends
within the city.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fos. 268b, 270.</p></note> It was found that within the city
and suburbs there were 106 parish churches<note place="foot"><p>The number of parishes is elsewhere given as 110.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 275.
A list of London benefices, under date 31 Edward I [1302-3], is given
in the City's Liber Custumarum (i, 228-230), the number being 116.</p></note> and
thirty prebends, but only two of the latter were within
the liberties. There was also the free chapel of St.
Martin's-le-Grand, which embraced eleven prebends,
all within the liberty of the city, and there were,
moreover, two other chapels within the liberty.
Besides these (the return stated) there were none
other.</p>

<note place="margin">The city as an ecclesiastical centre.</note>

<p>The bare fact that there existed over 100 parishes,
each with its parish church, within so small an area
as that covered by the city and its suburbs, is of itself
sufficient to remind us that, besides having a municipal
and commercial history, the city also possesses an
ecclesiastical. The church of St. Paul, the largest
foundation in the city, with its resident canons exercising
magnificent hospitality, was a centre to which
London looked as a mother, although it was not
strictly speaking the metropolitan cathedral. That
title properly applies to the Minster at Canterbury;
but the church of Canterbury being in the hands of
a monastic chapter left St. Paul's at the head of the
secular clergy of southern England.<note place="foot"><p>Ralph de Diceto (Rolls Series No. 68), pref. vol. i, p. lvi.</p></note> Besides the
hundred and more churches there were monastic establishments
and colleges which covered a good fourth
part of the whole city. The collegiate church of St.
Martin's-le-Grand almost rivalled its neighbour the<pb n="204" /><anchor id="Pg204" />
cathedral church itself in the area of its precinct. The
houses of the Black Friars and Grey Friars in the
west were only equalled by those belonging to the
Augustine and Crossed Friars towards the east; while
the Priory of St. Bartholomew found a counterpart in
the Priory of Holy Trinity. The church was everywhere
and ruled everything, and its influence manifests
itself nowhere more strongly than in the number of
ecclesiastical topics which fill the pages of early
chronicles in connection with London.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Edward I and II, introd., vol. i., p. xli.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The prosecution of the war, 1371-1375.</note>

<p>The war brought little credit or advantage in
return for outlay. In January, 1371, the Black Prince
had returned to England with the glory of former
achievements sullied by his massacre at Limoges, and
the City of London had made him a present of
valuable plate.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 271. (Memorials, pp. 350-352).</p></note> The conduct of the war was transferred
to his eldest surviving brother, John of Gaunt,
Duke of Lancaster. In 1372 the king himself set out
with the flower of the English nobility, and accompanied
by a band of London archers and crossbow
men.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 289b.</p></note> The expedition, which had for its object the
relief of Rochelle, and which is said to have cost no
less than £900,000, proved disastrous, and Edward
returned after a brief absence.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, i, 315.</p></note> In 1373 the city
furnished him with a transport barge called "The
Paul of London." The barge when it left London
for Southampton was fully supplied with rigging and
tackle; nevertheless, on its arrival at the latter port,
it was found to be so deficient in equipment that it<pb n="205" /><anchor id="Pg205" /><index index="toc" level1="PROCEEDINGS OF THE GOOD PARLIAMENT." />
could not proceed to sea. The only explanation that
the master of the barge could give of the matter was
that a certain number of anchors and cables had been
lost on the voyage. The City paid twenty marks to
make up the defects.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fos. 297, 298, 304b, 306b, 307.</p></note> The year was marked by a
campaign under Lancaster which ended in the utmost
disaster. The French avoided a general action; the
English soldiers deserted, and as the winter came on
the troops perished from cold, hunger and disease.
By 1374 the French had recovered nearly all of their
former possessions. England was tired of the war
and of the ceaseless expenditure it involved. It was
with no little joy that the Londoners heard, in July,
1375,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book G, fo. 312b. Letter Book H, fos. 17-19b.</p></note> that peace had been concluded.</p>

<note place="margin">Charges against city aldermen, 1376.</note>

<p>In April, 1376, a parliament met, known as the
Good Parliament,<note place="foot"><p>The parliament was originally summoned for the 12th February,
but did not meet before the 28 April. The city members were John
Pyel and William Walworth, Aldermen, William Essex and Adam
Carlile, commoners.&mdash;Letter Book H. fos. 28. 29.</p></note> and before granting supply it
demanded an account of former receipts and expenditure.
No less than three city aldermen were charged
with malversation. Richard Lyons, of Broad Street
ward, was convicted with Lord Latimer of embezzling
the king's revenue, and sentenced to imprisonment
and forfeiture of goods.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ (Rolls Series No. 64), 78, 79.</p></note> Adam de Bury, of Langbourn
ward, who had twice served the office of mayor, was
charged with appropriating money subscribed for the
ransom of the French king and fled to Flanders to
avoid trial;<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham i, 321. Higden's Polychron (Rolls Series No. 41),
viii, 385. Chron. Angliæ (Rolls Series No. 64), pp. 94, 392.</p></note> whilst John Pecche of Walbrook ward<pb n="206" /><anchor id="Pg206" />
was convicted of an extortionate exercise of a monopoly
of sweet wines and his patent annulled. All
three aldermen were deposed from their aldermanries
by order of an assembly of citizens composed of representatives
from the various guilds and not from the
wards.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 45b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A new system of election by the guilds, instead of the wards, introduced, 1376.</note>

<p>The guilds, indeed, were now claiming a more
direct participation in the government of the city
than they had hitherto enjoyed, and their claim had
given rise to so much commotion that the king himself
threatened to interpose.<note place="foot"><p>See the king's letter, dated "Haddele" Castle, 29 July, 1376.&mdash;Letter
Book H, fo. 44.</p></note> The threat was not
liked, and the citizens hastened to assure him that no
disturbance had occurred in the city beyond what
proceeded from reasonable debate on an open question,
and that to prevent the noise and tumult arising
from large assemblies, they had unanimously decided
that in future the Common Council should be chosen
from the guilds and not otherwise.<note place="foot"><p>The names of the representatives of the guilds forming the first
Common Council of the kind are placed on record.&mdash;Letter Book H,
fos. 46b, 47.</p></note> This reply was
sent to the king by the hands of two aldermen&mdash;William
Walworth and Nicholas Brembre&mdash;and six
commoners, and the following day (2 August) the
king sent another letter accepting the explanation
that had been offered, and expressing a hope that the
city would be so governed as not to require his personal
intervention.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 44b.</p></note></p>

<p>Not only was the common council to be selected
in future by the guilds, but the guilds were also to elect
the mayor and the sheriffs.  The aldermen and the<pb n="207" /><anchor id="Pg207" /><index index="toc" level1="THE COMMON COUNCIL CHOSEN FROM THE GUILDS." />
commons were to meet together at least once a
quarter,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 46.</p></note> and no member of the common council was
to serve on inquests, nor be appointed collector or
assessor of a talliage. This last provision may have
been due to the recent discoveries of malversation, but,
however that may be, it was found to work so well that
it was more than once re-enacted.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 47, 161; Journal 11, fo. 89.</p></note> These changes in
the internal administration of the city were avowedly
made by virtue of Edward's charter, which specifically
gave the citizens a right to remedy hard or defective
customs.<note place="foot"><p>Charter, dated 26 May, 15 Edward III, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Supra</hi> p. 188.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The old system of election by wards reverted to in 1384.</note>

<p>The power of the guilds in the matter of elections
to the common council was not of long duration.
Before ten years had elapsed representation was
made that the new system had been forced on the
citizens, and in 1384 it was resolved to revert to the
old system of election by and from the wards.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 173.&mdash;The names of those elected by the
wards to the Common Council two years later (9 Ric. II), are inserted
on a cedula between membranes, 15 and 16, of Pleas and Memoranda,
Roll A 27.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proceedings against Alice Perers, the king's mistress, 1376.</note>

<p>Encouraged by the success which had so far
attended their efforts of reform, the good parliament
next attacked Alice Perers, the king's mistress. Of
humble origin, and not even possessing the quality of
good looks, this lady, for whom the mediæval chroniclers
have scarcely a good word to say,<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, i, 327. Chron. Angliæ, pp. 142, 143. Modern
writers, however, have discovered some good qualities in this lady.&mdash;See
Notes and Queries, 7th Series, vol. vii, pp. 449, <hi rend="font-style: italic">et seq.</hi></p></note> nevertheless
gained so complete a mastery over the king as to
favour the popular belief that she indulged in magic.
At length her barefaced interference in public affairs<pb n="208" /><anchor id="Pg208" />
led to an award against her of banishment and forfeiture.
Upon the dissolution of the good parliament
(6 July, 1376), and the meeting of a new parliament,
elected under the direct influence of the Earl of Lancaster,
who once more gained the upper hand now
that the Black Prince was dead, Alice Perers was
allowed to return.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, p. 130.</p></note> She was again in disgrace soon
after Richard's accession, when her property, much of
which consisted of real estate in the City,<note place="foot"><p>See Hust., Rolls, 95, (130) (13O); 97, (9); 98, (73) (74)
(82); 109, (6) (7) (8); also Will of William Burton&mdash;Calendar of
Wills, Court of Hust., London, ii, 301.</p></note> became
escheated, and the citizens of London were promised
redress for any harm she might have done them.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 77b.</p></note>
She was afterwards married to Sir William de Windsor,
who, in 1376, had got himself into trouble over a
disturbance in Whitefriars<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 47b.</p></note>&mdash;a quarter of the city
which, under the name of Alsatia, became afterwards
notorious for riots, and as the resort of bad characters.
Towards the close of 1379 her sentence of banishment,
never strictly enforced, was revoked and pardon
extended to her and her husband.<note place="foot"><p>Pat. Roll, 3 Ric. II, part 1.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Charter forbidding free trade to merchant strangers, 4 Dec., 1376.</note>

<p>In December, 1376, the citizens obtained a charter
from the king, with the assent of parliament, granting
that no strangers (<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> non-freemen) should thenceforth
be allowed to sell by retail within the city and suburbs.
This had always been considered a grievance,
ever since free trade had been granted to merchant
strangers by the parliament held at York in 1335.</p>

<note place="margin">Hostility between the City and Lancaster.</note>

<p>The last year of Edward's reign was one of serious
opposition between the City and the selfish and unprincipled<pb n="209" /><anchor id="Pg209" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE DUKE OF LANCASTER." />
Lancaster. In so far as the duke, with the
assistance of Wycliffe, meditated a reform among the
higher clergy, he might, if he would, have had the
city with him. The citizens, like the great reformer
himself, were opposed to the practice of the clergy
heaping up riches and intermeddling with political
matters. The duke, however, went out of his way
to hurt the feelings of the citizens, by proposing to
abolish the mayoralty and otherwise encroach upon
their liberties.<note place="foot"><p>"Ut de cetero non major, antiquo more, sed capitaneus Londoniis
haberetur, et quod Marescallus Angliæ in illa civitate, sicut alibi, reos
arestare valeret; cum multis petitionibus quæ; manifeste obviabant urbis
libertatibus et imminebant civium detrimento."&mdash;Chron. Angliæ, p. 120.</p></note> Not content with this he took the
occasion when Wycliffe was summoned to appear at St.
Paul's (19 Feb., 1377), to offer violence to Courtenay,
their bishop. This so incensed the citizens that the
meeting broke up in confusion. The next day the
mob, now thoroughly roused, hastened to the Savoy
where the duke resided. He happened, however, to be
dining in the city at the time, with a certain John de
Ypre. The company had scarcely sat down to their
oysters before a soldier knocked at the door and
warned them of the danger. They forthwith jumped
up from the table, the duke barking his shins (we
are told) in so doing, and, making their way to the
riverside, took boat for Kennington, where the duke
sought protection in the house of the Princess of
Wales. Thanks to the intervention of the bishop,
who appeared on the scene, the mob did but little
serious harm, beyond ill-using a priest and some of
the duke's retainers whom they happened to come
across.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, pp. 123-125, 397; Walsingham, i, 325.</p></note></p>

<pb n="210" /><anchor id="Pg210" />

<note place="margin">Interview between the king and the citizens to explain matters.</note>

<p>The civic authorities were naturally anxious as to
what the king might say and do in consequence of
the outbreak, and desired an interview in order to
explain matters. Lancaster was opposed to any such
interview taking place. The London mob had seized
upon an escutcheon of the duke, displayed in some
public thoroughfare, and had reversed it by way of
signifying that it was the escutcheon of a traitor.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, pp. 125, 398.</p></note>
This had particularly raised his anger. Nevertheless,
in spite of his efforts to prevent it, an interview was
accorded to a deputation from the city, of which John
Philipot acted as spokesman. After drawing the
king's attention to the threatened attack on the
privileges of the city, and the proposed substitution of
a "captain" for a mayor, Philipot offered an apology
for the late riot. It had taken place, he said, without
the cognisance of the civic authorities. Among a large
population there were sure to be some bad characters
whom it was difficult to restrain, even by the authority
of the mayor, when once excited. A mob acted after
the manner of a tornado, flying hither and thither,
bent on committing havoc at anybody's expense, even
its own, but, thank God! the duke had suffered no
harm nor had any of his retinue been hurt. The king
having listened to the deputation, assured them in
reply, that so far from wishing to lessen the privileges
of the city, he had a mind to enlarge them. They
were not to alarm themselves, but to go home and
endeavour to preserve peace. On leaving the presence
the deputation met the duke, with whom they interchanged
courtesies.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 127, 128.</p></note> In the meanwhile lampoons on
the duke were posted in the city. The duke became<pb n="211" /><anchor id="Pg211" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MAYOR AND ALDERMEN REMOVED." />
furious and demanded the excommunication of the
authors. The bishops hesitated through fear of the
mob, but at last the Bishop of Bangor was induced by
representations made to him by leading citizens, who
wished it to be known that they did not approve of
such libels, to execute the duke's wishes.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, p. 129.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Another interview with the king at Shene.</note>

<p>The duke was determined to have his revenge, and
again the citizens were summoned to appear before
the king, who was lying at Shene. This time they did
not get off so easily. The mayor, Adam Stable, was
removed, and Nicholas Brembre appointed in his
place. A fresh election of aldermen took place,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 58, 59.</p></note> and
the City did penance for the recent insult to the duke's
escutcheon by offering, at the king's confidential suggestion,
a wax taper bearing the duke's arms in St.
Paul's. Even that did not satisfy him; nay, it was
adding insult to injury (he said), for such an act was
an honour usually paid to one who was dead! The
citizens were in despair, and doubted if anything would
satisfy him, short of proclaiming him king.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, p. 134.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's death, 21 June, 1377.</note>

<p>One of the last acts of Edward was to restore the
Bishop of Winchester to the temporalities of which
he had been deprived by the duke, and this restitution
was made at the instance and by the influence of
Alice Perers,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, p. 129.</p></note> who within a few weeks robbed her
dying paramour of his finger rings and fled.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 136-137, 142-143.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="212" /><anchor id="Pg212" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IX.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">Reconciliation between Lancaster and the City, 1377.</note>

<p>Shortly after Edward had breathed his last, a
deputation from the City waited upon the Prince of
Wales at Kennington. John Philipot again acted as
spokesman, and after alluding to the loss which the
country had recently sustained, and recommending
the City of London&mdash;the "king's chamber"&mdash;to the
prince's favour, begged him to assist in effecting a
reconciliation with Lancaster. This Richard promised
to do, and a few days later the deputation again
waited on the young king&mdash;this time at Shene, where
preparations were being made for the late king's
obsequies&mdash;and a reconciliation took place, the king
kissing each member of the deputation, and promising
to be their friend, and to look after the City's
interests as if they were his own.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, pp. 146-149. The chronicler expresses the utmost
joy and astonishment at the sudden change in the duke's manner. It
was (he says) nothing less than a miracle that one who had so recently
demanded a present of precious stones and 100 tuns of wine, as the
price of his favour, should now appear so complacent.</p></note> Formal announcement
of the reconciliation was afterwards made at
Westminster, and Peter de la Mare, long a prisoner
in Nottingham Castle, was set free, to the great joy of
the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 150, 151.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The coronation of Richard II, 16 July, 1377.</note>

<p>At the express wish of the citizens, Richard&mdash;the
"Londoners' king," as the nobles were in the
habit of cynically styling the new sovereign, for the<pb n="213" /><anchor id="Pg213" /><index index="toc" level1="RICHARD THE &quot;LONDONERS' KING.&quot;" />
reason that he had ascended the throne more by the
assistance of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">bourgeois</hi> Londoner than of the
nobility<note place="foot"><p>"Londonienses præcipue obloquebantur, dicentes jam perpaucorum
proceruin corda fore cum Rege, eos solos sibi fideles esse; quorum
Rex licet ironice, vocabatur a nonnullis proceribus, eo quod ipsi multum
juvissent eum in coronatione sua."&mdash;Walsingham i, 370; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Chron.
Angliæ, p. 200.</p></note>&mdash;took up his quarters at the Tower, whence
he proceeded in state to Westminster for his coronation.
Great preparations were made in the city to
tender his progress through the streets one of exceptional
splendour. The claim of the mayor and
citizens to assist the chief butler at the banquet was
discourteously refused by Robert Belknap, Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, who bluntly told them that
they might be of service in washing up the pots and
pans. The citizens had their revenge, however.
They set up an effigy of the man at a conspicuous
arch or tower in Cheapside, in which he appeared to
the whole of the procession as it passed on its way to
Westminster, in the ignominious attitude of vomiting
wine.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, p. 153.</p></note> This was enough; the Londoners gained the
day, and were allowed to perform their customary
services at the banquet, and the mayor got his gold
cup.<note place="foot"><p>Lib. Cust. ii, 467, 468. It appears from the City Records, that
the king's butler in ordinary could claim the office of Coroner of the
city.&mdash;See Letter Book H, fos. 68, 77b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A city loan and parliamentary supplies, 1377.</note>

<p>Richard was only eleven years of age when
raised to the throne. A council was therefore
appointed to govern in his name. Neither the Duke
of Lancaster nor any other of the king's uncles were
elected councillors, and, for a time, John of Gaunt
retired into comparative privacy. The task of the
council was not easy. The French plundered the<pb n="214" /><anchor id="Pg214" />
coast,<note place="foot"><p>The Isle of Wight had been surprised and taken, Rye had been
captured, Hastings had been destroyed by fire, and Winchelsea would
have fallen into the hands of the enemy but for the bold defence made
by the Abbot of Battle.&mdash;Walsingham i, 340-342; Chron. Angliæ,
pp. 151, 166, 167.</p></note> and the Scots plundered the borders. Money
was sorely needed. The City consented to advance
the sum of £5,000 upon the security of the customs
of the Port of London and of certain plate and jewels,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 76-77, 83.</p></note>
and when parliament met (13 Oct., 1377) it made a
liberal grant of two tenths and two fifteenths, which
was to be collected without delay, on the understanding
that two treasurers should be appointed to superintend
the due application of the money.<note place="foot"><p>Et deputati sunt ad hujus pecuniæ custodiam duo cives Londonienses,
scilicet Willelmus Walworthe et Johannes Philipot.&mdash;Chron.
Angliæ, p. 171. Eight other citizens, viz., Adam Lovekyn, William
Tonge, Thomas Welford, Robert Lucas, John Hadley, John Northampton,
John Organ, and John Sely, were appointed collectors of the
two fifteenths.&mdash;Letter Book H, fo. 90.</p></note> The two
treasurers appointed for this purpose were two citizens
of note, namely, William Walworth and John
Philipot, of whose financial capability mention has
already been made.</p>

<note place="margin">Charter granted to the city with the assent of parliament, 4 Dec., 1377.</note>

<p>Before parliament broke up it gave its assent to
a new charter to the City.<note place="foot"><p>Dated 4 Dec, 1377. Preserved at the Guildhall (Box No. 9).</p></note> Foreigners (<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> non-freemen)
were again forbidden to traffic in the city
among themselves by retail, and the City's franchises
were confirmed and enlarged. So much importance
was attached to this charter that Brembre, the mayor,
caused its main provisions to be published throughout
the city.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 82.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The subsidy taken out of the hands of Walworth and Philipot, 1378.</note>

<p>Lancaster soon became tired of playing a subordinate
part in the government of the kingdom. As<pb n="215" /><anchor id="Pg215" /><index index="toc" level1="JOHN PHILIPOT." />
a preliminary step to higher aims, he contrived,
after some little opposition, to obtain the removal of
the subsidy granted by the last parliament, out of the
hands of Walworth and Philipot into his own, although
these men had given no cause for suspicion of dishonourable
conduct in the execution of their public
trust.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, p. 194: Walsingham i, 367. It was stated before
parliament, in 1378, that Walworth and Philipot had laid out every
penny of the subsidy.&mdash;Stubbs, Const. Hist., ii, 445 note.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Patriotic conduct of John Philipot.</note>

<p>The energetic John Philipot soon found other
work to do. The English coast had recently become
infested with a band of pirates, who, having already
made a successful descent upon Scarborough, were
now seeking fresh adventures. Philipot fitted out a
fleet at his own expense, and putting to sea succeeded
in capturing the ringleader,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. Angliæ, pp. 199, 200. Philipot again showed his patriotism
in 1380, by providing money and arms for an expedition sent to assist
the Duke of Brittany.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 266. He died in the summer of 1384.&mdash;Walsingham,
ii, 115.</p></note> a feat which rendered
him so popular as to excite the jealousy of the Duke
of Lancaster and other nobles. His fellow citizens
showed their appreciation of his character by electing
him to succeed Brembre in the mayoralty in October
(1378).<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 95.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Factions in the City for and against the Duke of Lancaster, 1378.</note>

<p>The citizens were, however, split up into factions,
one party, with Philipot and Brembre at his head, maintaining
a stubborn opposition to Lancaster, whilst
another, under the leadership of Walworth and John
de Northampton, favoured the duke. These factions
were continually plotting and counter-plotting one
against the other. At Gloucester, to which the duke
had brought the parliament in 1378, in the hope of<pb n="216" /><anchor id="Pg216" />
escaping from the interference of the "ribald" Londoners,<note place="foot"><p>"Et idcirco locum illum elegerant præmeditato facinori; ne Londonienses,
si Londoniis fuisset Parliamentum prædictum, sua auctoritate
vel potentia eorum conatus ullatenus impedirent."&mdash;Walsingham, i, 380.</p></note>
Brembre was arraigned on a charge of having
connived during his recent mayoralty at an attack
made on the house of the duke's younger brother,
Thomas of Woodstock, Earl of Buckingham, and
although he succeeded in proving his innocence, the
earl and his party continued to use threats, and
Brembre, in order to smooth matters over, consented
to be mulcted in 100 marks. When the matter was
reported to the Common Council at home (25 Nov.),
that body not only signified its approval of his conduct&mdash;"knowing
for certain that it was for no demerits
of his own, but for the preservation of the
liberties of the city, and for the extreme love
which he bore it, that he had undergone such
labours and expenses,"&mdash;but recouped him what he
had disbursed.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 101b. (Memorials, p. 427).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Earl of Buckingham and his partizans withdraw themselves and their custom from the City, 1378.</note>

<p>In course of time the earl and his followers succeeded
in persecuting Brembre to a disgraceful death.
At present they contented themselves with damaging
the trade of the city, so far as they could, by leaving
the city <hi rend="font-style: italic">en masse</hi> and withdrawing their custom. The
result was so disastrous to the citizens, more especially
to the hostel keepers and victuallers, that the civic
authorities resolved to win the nobles back to the city
by wholesale bribery, and, as the city's "chamber"
was empty, a subscription list was set on foot to raise a
fund for the purpose. Philipot, the mayor, headed the
list with £10, a sum just double that of any other subscriber.
Six others, among them being Brembre (the<pb n="217" /><anchor id="Pg217" />
<index index="toc" level1="A CITY LOAN OF £5,000." />
earl's particular enemy) and Walworth, subscribed respectively
£5; whilst the rest contributed sums varying
from £4 down to five marks, the last mentioned sum
being subscribed by Richard "Whytyngdon" of
famous memory.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 109b, 110.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Another City loan of £5,000, Feb., 1379.</note>

<p>The grants made to the king by the parliament
at Gloucester were soon exhausted by the war, and
recourse was had, as usual, to the City. In February,
1379, the mayor and aldermen were sent for to Westminster.
They were told that the king's necessities
demanded an immediate supply of money, and that
the Duke of Lancaster and the rest of the nobility
had consented to contribute. What would the City
do? After a brief consultation apart, the mayor and
aldermen suggested that the usual course should be
followed and that they should be allowed to consult
the general body of the citizens in the Guildhall.
Eventually the City consented to advance another
sum of £5,000 on the same security as before, but
any tax imposed by parliament at its next session was
to be taken as a set off.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 107, 108, 109.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The poll-tax of 1379.</note>

<p>At the session of parliament held in April and
May (1379), the demand for further supply became
so urgent that a poll-tax was imposed on a graduated
scale according to a man's dignity, ranging from ten
marks or £6 1<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> imposed on a duke, to a groat or
four pence which the poorest peasant was called upon
to pay. The mayor of London, assessed as an earl,
was to pay £4; and the aldermen, assessed as barons,
£2. The sum thus furnished by the city amounted
to less than £700,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 111b, 113.</p></note> and the whole amount levied on<pb n="218" /><anchor id="Pg218" />
the country did not exceed £22,000, a sum far short
of what had been anticipated.</p>

<note place="margin">Renewal of the poll-tax, 1380.</note>

<p>In the following year (1380) there was a recurrence
to the old method of raising money, but
this proving still insufficient a poll-tax was again
resorted to. This time, the smallest sum exacted
was not less than three groats, and was payable on
everyman, woman and unmarried child, above the age
of fifteen, throughout the country. The amount thus
raised in the city and liberties was just over £1000.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 128, 132.</p></note>
The tax was especially irritating from its inquisitorial
character, and led to serious consequences.</p>

<note place="margin">The peasants' revolt under Wat Tyler, 1381.</note>

<p>The country was already suffering under a general
discontent, when a certain Wat Tyler in Kent struck
down a collector of the poll-tax, who attempted in an
indecent manner to discover his daughter's age. This
was the signal for a revolt of the peasants from one
end of England to the other, not only against payment
of this particular tax, but against taxes and
landlords generally. The men of Essex joined forces
with those of Kent on Blackheath, and thence
marched on London. With the aid of sympathisers
within the City's gates, the effected an entrance on
the night of the 12th of June, and made free with the
wine cellars of the wealthier class. The next day,
the rebels, more mad than drunk (<hi rend="font-style: italic">non tam ebrii quam
dementes</hi>), stirred up the populace to make a raid
upon the Duke of Lancaster's palace of the Savoy.
This they sacked and burnt to the ground. They
next vented their wrath upon the Temple, and afterwards
upon the house of the Knight's Hospitallers at<pb n="219" /><anchor id="Pg219" /><index index="toc" level1="THE POLL-TAX AND PEASANTS' REVOLT." />
Clerkenwell. In the meantime reinforcements were
gathering in Essex under the leadership of one known
as "Jack Straw," and were hurrying to London. At
Mile End they were met (14 June) by the young king
himself, who set out from the Tower for that purpose,
accompanied by a retinue of knights and esquires on
horseback, as well as by his mother in a drawn
vehicle. The rebels demanded the surrender of all
traitors to the king. To this Richard gave his assent,
and having done so returned to the city to take up
his quarters at the Wardrobe, near Castle Baynard,
whilst the rebels, availing themselves of the king's
word, hurried off to the Tower. There they found
Simon of Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, and he
and others were beheaded on Tower Hill. The rest
of the day and the whole of the next were given up
to plunder and massacre, so that the narrow streets
were choked with corpses. Among those who perished
at the hands of the rebels was Richard Lyons, the
deposed alderman. At length, on the evening of
Saturday, the 15th, when the king had ridden to
Smithfield accompanied by Walworth, the mayor,
and a large retinue in order to discuss matters with
Wat Tyler (the Essex men had for the most part
returned home), an altercation happened to arise between
Tyler and one of the royal suite. Words were
about to lead to blows when the mayor himself interposed,
and summarily executed the king's order to
arrest Tyler by bringing him to the ground by a fatal
blow of his dagger. Deprived of their leader the mob
became furious, and demanded Walworth's head; the
mayor, however, contrived to slip back into the City,
whence he quickly returned with such a force that the<pb n="220" /><anchor id="Pg220" />
rioters were surrounded and compelled to submit.
The king intervened to prevent further bloodshed,
and knighted on the field not only Walworth, but
also Nicholas Brembre, John Philipot and Robert
Launde.<note place="foot"><p>The story of the insurrection under Wat Tyler, and of his death
at the hands of Walworth, as told in Letter Book H, fo. 133b (Memorials,
pp. 449-451), varies in some particulars from that given by Walsingham
(i, 454-465), and in the Chronicon Angliæ (pp. 285-297).</p></note> The same day a royal commission was
issued to enquire into the late riot and to bring the
offenders to account.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 134.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Orders given for safeguarding the city, 20 June.</note>

<p>Orders were given on the 20th June to each alderman
to provide men-at-arms and archers to guard in
turns the city's gates, and to see that no armed person
entered the city, except those who declared on oath
that they were about to join the king's expedition
against the rebels. In the meantime, the aldermen
were to make returns of all who kept hostels in their
several wards.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 134b.</p></note> In a list, containing nearly 200 names
of divers persons of bad character, who had left the
city by reason of the insurrection,<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 24, membr. 9.</p></note> there appear the
names of two servants of Henry "Grenecobbe."
The name is far from common, and we shall not perhaps
be far wrong in conjecturing that the owner of
it was a relation of William "Gryndecobbe," who
led the insurgents against the abbey of St. Albans and
compelled the abbot to surrender its charter.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, i, 467-484; ii, 23.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Confession made by "Jack Straw."</note>

<p>"Jack Straw," on being brought before the mayor,
was induced by promises of masses for the good of his
soul, to confess the nature of the intentions of the
rioters, which were to use the king's person as a<pb n="221" /><anchor id="Pg221" /><index index="toc" level1="REFORMS UNDER JOHN DE NORTHAMPTON." />
stalking horse for drawing people to their side, and
eventually to kill him and all in authority throughout
the kingdom. The mendicant friars, who were believed
to be at the bottom of the insurrection,<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 13.</p></note> were
alone to be spared. Wat Tyler was to be made king
of Kent, whilst others were to be placed in similar
positions over the rest of the counties. The mayor
sentenced him to be beheaded. This done, his head
was set up on London Bridge, where Wat Tyler's
already figured.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, ii, 9, 10.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Revulsion of feeling against the Lollards after the suppression of the peasants' revolt, 1382.</note>

<p>The discontent which had given rise to the
peasants' revolt, had been fanned by the attacks made
by Wycliffe's "simple priests" upon the rich and idle
clergy. The revolt occasioned a bitter feeling among
the landlord class against Wycliffe and his followers,
and after its suppression the Lollards were made the
object of much animadversion. Their preaching was
forbidden,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 149b, 150.</p></note> and Wycliffe was obliged to retire to his
country parsonage, where he continued to labour with
his pen for the cause he had so much at heart, until
his death in 1384.</p>

<note place="margin">Reforms in the city during Northampton's first mayoralty, 1381-1382.</note>

<p>The majority of the citizens favoured the doctrines
of Wycliffe and his followers and endeavoured to
carry them out. The Duke of Lancaster had no real
sympathy with the Lollards; he only wished to make
use of them for a political purpose. It was otherwise
with the Londoners, and with John de Northampton,
a supporter of the duke, who succeeded to the
mayoralty soon after the suppression of the revolt.
Under Northampton&mdash;a man whom even his enemies
allowed to be of stern purpose, not truckling to those<pb n="222" /><anchor id="Pg222" />
above him, nor bending to his inferiors,<note place="foot"><p>"Homo duri cordis et astutus, elatus propter divitias et superbus,
qui nec inferioribus adquiescere, nec superiorum allegationibus sive
monitis flecti valeret quin quod inceperat proprio ingenio torvo proposito
ad quemcunque finem perducere niteretur."&mdash;Walsingham, ii, 65.</p></note>&mdash;many
reforms were carried out, ecclesiastical as well as civil.</p>

<p>The ecclesiastical courts having grossly failed in
their duty, the citizens themselves, fearful of God's
vengeance if matters were allowed to continue as they
were, undertook the work of reform within the city's
walls. The fees of the city parsons were cut down.
The fee for baptism was not to exceed forty pence,
whilst that for marriage was not as a general rule to
be more than half a mark. One farthing was all that
could be demanded for a mass for the dead, and the
priest was bound to give change for a half-penny
when requested or forego his fee.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 144. (Memorials, p. 463).</p></note> Steps were taken
at the same time to improve the morality of the
city by ridding the streets of lewd women and licentious
men. On the occasion of a first offence, culprits
of either sex were subjected to the ignominy of
having their hair cropt for future identification, and
then conducted with rough music through the public
thoroughfares, the men to the pillory and the women
to the "thewe." After a third conviction, they were
made to abjure the City altogether.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 146b.</p></note> It was during
Northampton's first year of the mayoralty that the
citizens succeeded in breaking down the monopoly of
the free fish-mongers. A number of "dossers" or
baskets for carrying fish were also seized because they
were deficient in holding capacity, and on that account
were calculated to defraud the purchaser.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 153-154.</p></note>  But,<pb n="223" /><anchor id="Pg223" /><index index="toc" level1="NICHOLAS EXTON, ALDERMAN, DEPOSED." />
although a mayor in those days exercised, no doubt,
greater power in the municipal government than now,
we must be careful to avoid the common mistake of
attributing to the individuality of the mayor for the
time being what was really the action of the citizens
as a body corporate.</p>

<note place="margin">Northampton re-elected mayor at the king's request, Oct., 1382.</note>

<p>In October, 1382, Northampton was elected
mayor for the second time, and Philipot, his rival,
either resigned or was deprived of his aldermancy.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 71. From the City's Records it appears that early
in 1383, William Baret was alderman of Philipot's ward (Cornhill); but
in the following year, when Brembre succeeded to his mayoralty, and
the so-called "king's party" was again in the ascendant, Philipot again
appears as alderman of his old ward, continuing in office until his death
(12 Sept., 1384), when he was succeeded by John Rote.&mdash;Letter
Book H, fos. 163, 174.</p></note>
His re-election was at the king's express wish. On
the 6th he wrote to the sheriffs, aldermen and commons
of the city intimating that, whilst anxious to
leave the citizens free choice in the matter of election
of their mayor, he would be personally gratified if
their choice fell upon the outgoing mayor. At first
Northampton declined re-election, but he afterwards
consented to serve another year on receiving a written
request from the king.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 155b.</p></note> His hesitation was probably
due to the factious state of the city. Brembre and
Philipot were not his only enemies. Another alderman,
Nicholas Exton, of Queenhithe Ward, had
recently been removed from his aldermancy for opprobrious
words used to Northampton during his first
mayoralty. A petition had been laid before the Court
of Common Council in August, 1382, when Exton himself
being present, and seeing the turn affairs were
taking, endeavoured to anticipate the judgment of the<pb n="224" /><anchor id="Pg224" />
court, by himself asking to be exonerated from his
office, declaring at the same time that he had offered
a large sum of money to be released at his election in
the first instance. The court wishing for further time
to consider the matter adjourned. At its next meeting
a similar petition was again presented, but the
court hesitated to pronounce judgment in the absence
of Exton, who was summoned to appear at the next
Common Council. When the court met again, it was
found that Exton had ignored the summons. Judgment
was, therefore, pronounced in his absence and he
was deprived of his aldermancy.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 154.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Brembre succeeds Northampton in the mayoralty, Oct., 1383.</note>

<p>At the close of Northampton's second mayoralty
(Oct., 1383), his place was taken by his rival, Nicholas
Brembre,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 168. Three years later, "the folk of the
Mercerye of London" complained to parliament that Brembre and his
"upberers" had on this occasion obtained his election by force&mdash;"through
debate and strenger partye."&mdash;(Rot., Parl. iii, 225). There
is no evidence of this in the City's Records, although there appears to
have been a disturbance at his re-election in 1384. It may be to this
that the Mercers' petition refers. It is noteworthy that at the time of
his election in 1383, Brembre was not an alderman, although in the previous
year, and again in the year following his election, he is recorded as
Alderman of Bread Street Ward.&mdash;Letter Book H, fos. 140, 163, 174.</p></note> and a general reversal of the order of things
took place. The free-fishmongers recovered their
ancient privileges,<note place="foot"><p>Breve quod piscenarii libertatis civitatis Londoniæ exerceant
artem suam ut consueverunt. Dated 27 Nov., 1383.&mdash;Letter Book H,
fo. 172.</p></note> and the judgment passed upon
Exton as well as a similar judgment passed upon
another alderman, Adam Carlile, were reversed.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 154-154b, 176-177.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richard's second charter to the City, 26 Nov., 1383.</note>

<p>Soon after Brembre's election the king confirmed
the City's liberties by charter,<note place="foot"><p>Dated 26 Nov., 7 Ric. II. Preserved at the Guildhall (Box
No. 9).</p></note> which had the assent
of parliament. Two years previously the citizens had<pb n="225" /><anchor id="Pg225" /><index index="toc" level1="PROCEEDINGS AGAINST JOHN DE NORTHAMPTON." />
besought the newly-married queen to use her interest
with Richard to that end.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 27, membr. 3 dors.</p></note> Her good offices, as well
as the fact that the City had recently advanced to
the king the sum of 4,000 marks, on the security
of the royal crown and other things,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 166, 167.</p></note> may have been
instrumental in obtaining for the citizens this fresh
confirmation of their rights.</p>

<note place="margin">Proceedings against Northampton.</note>

<p>In January (1384) Northampton was bound over
to keep the peace in the sum of £5,000;<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 27, membr. 3.</p></note> but in the
following month he was put under arrest (together
with his brother, known as Robert "Cumberton," and
another), for raising a disturbance in the City, and
sent to Corfe Castle.<note place="foot"><p>Writ dated 9 February; Letter Box H, fo. 173b.</p></note> For Northampton's arrest, as
well as for the summary execution of a certain
John Constantyn, a cordwainer, who had been convicted
of taking a leading part in the disturbance,
Brembre received a letter of indemnity from the
king.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 173b, 174b.</p></note> The riot had one good effect. It roused
public opinion against monopolies and restriction of
trade to such an extent, that Richard very soon afterwards
caused the city to be opened freely to all
foreigners <hi rend="font-style: italic">(i.e.</hi>, non-freemen) wishing to sell fish or
other victuals.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 174.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Trial of Northampton at Reading.</note>

<p>In August (1384) the opinion of each individual
member of the Common Council was taken on oath,
as to whether it would be to the advantage or disadvantage
of the city if Northampton were allowed to
return; and it was unanimously found that his return<pb n="226" /><anchor id="Pg226" />
would breed dissension rather than peace and unity.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 179.</p></note>
Armed with this <hi rend="font-style: italic">plébiscite</hi> the mayor and a number
of citizens, whom the king had summoned by name,
attended a council at Reading for the purpose of
determining the fate of Northampton. The accused
contented himself with objecting to sentence being
passed against him in the absence of his patron the
Duke of Lancaster. This, however, availed him
nothing, and he was sentenced to perpetual imprisonment
in Tintagel Castle.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 179b; Walsingham, ii, 116.</p></note> Another authority<note place="foot"><p>Hidgen, Polychron. (Rolls Series No. 41), ix, 45 <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi></p></note> states
that the mayor brought with him to the council a
man named Thomas Husk or Usk (whose name, by
the way, does not appear in the list which the king
forwarded to the mayor), who made a number of
charges against Northampton. The prisoner so far
forgot himself in the royal presence as to call Usk a
liar, and to challenge him to a duel. Matters were
not improved by Northampton's appeal for delay in
passing sentence upon him in the absence of the
Duke of Lancaster. Richard flushed crimson with
anger at the proposal, declaring that he was ready to
sit in judgment upon the duke no less than on Northampton,
and forthwith ordered the latter's execution,
and the confiscation of his goods. The sentence would
have been earned out but for the timely intercession
of the queen, who flung herself at her husband's feet
and begged for the prisoner's life. The queen's prayer
was granted, and Northampton was condemned to
perpetual imprisonment and remitted to Corfe Castle.
Thence, at the beginning of September, he was removed<pb n="227" /><anchor id="Pg227" /><index index="toc" level1="NORTHAMPTON CONFINED IN TINTAGEL CASTLE." />
to the Tower of London, where two of his partisans,
John More, one of the sheriffs, and Richard Northbury,
recently arrested, were lodged.</p>

<note place="margin">Is committed to Tintagel Castle.</note>

<p>The Chief Justice, Tressilian, hesitated to take any
steps against the prisoners, one of whom had already
been tried and sentenced, asserting that the matter
lay within the jurisdiction of the mayor. His scruples,
however, on this score were easily set aside, and on
the 10th September, each of the prisoners was sentenced
to be drawn and hanged. No sooner was
sentence passed than the chancellor, Michael de la
Pole, entered on the scene, and proclaimed that the
king's grace had been extended to the prisoners, that
there lives would be spared, but that they would be
imprisoned until further favour should be shown them.
They were accordingly sent off to various fortresses;
Northampton to Tintagel Castle in Cornwall, Northbury
to Corfe Castle, and More to Nottingham; and
all this arose, says the Chronicler, from the rivalry of
fishmongers.<note place="foot"><p>"Hæc autem omnia sibi fieri procurarunt æmuli piscarii, ut
dicebabur, quia per illos stetit quod ars et curia eorum erant destructæ."&mdash;Higden,
ix, 49.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Brembre's re-election to the mayoralty, Oct., 1384.</note>

<p>When Brembre sought re-election to the mayoralty
in October, 1384, he found a formidable competitor in
Nicholas Twyford, with whom he had not always
been on the best of terms. It was in 1378, when
Twyford was sheriff and Brembre was occupying the
mayoralty chair for the first time, that they fell out,
the occasion being one of those trade disputes so
frequent in the City's annals. A number of goldsmiths
and pepperers had come to loggerheads in
St. Paul's Churchyard during sermon time, and the<pb n="228" /><anchor id="Pg228" />
mayor had committed one of the ringleaders to the
compter. The culprit, however, happened to be, like
Twyford, a goldsmith, and was one of his suite.
Twyford resented his man being sent to prison, and
for his pains got arrested himself.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 92. (Memorials, pp. 415-417).</p></note> It was felt that
the election would be hotly contested and might
lead to disturbance. Besides the customary precept
issued by the mayor forbidding any to appear who
were not specially summoned,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 182. The names of those specially summoned
are set out in Pleas and Mem., Roll A 27, membr. 15.</p></note> the king took the
precaution of sending John de Nevill, of Roby, to
the Guildhall to see that the election was properly
conducted. In spite of all precautions, however, a
disturbance took place, and some of the rioters were
afterwards bound over to keep the peace.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 27, membr. 4, 5 and 6.</p></note> It is
said that Brembre himself secreted a body of men
in the neighbourhood of the Guildhall, and that
when he found the election going against him, he
signalled for them, and Twyford's supporters were
compelled to flee for safety, and that thus the election
was won.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 50, 51.</p></note> Nothing of this appears in the City's
Records, where Brembre's re-election is entered in the
manner of the day.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 182.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Renewed efforts to obtain Northampton's release, March, 1386.</note>

<p>In 1385 Brembre was again elected mayor, and
continued in office until October, 1386, when he was
succeeded by his friend and ally, Nicholas Exton.
This was the fourth and last time Brembre was
mayor. In the meantime, the Duke of Lancaster
and his party had renewed their efforts to effect the
release of Northampton and of his fellow prisoners,<pb n="229" /><anchor id="Pg229" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BOOK CALLED &quot;JUBILEE.&quot;" />
More and Northbury, on the understanding that they
were not to come near the City, and Brembre again
took the opinion of the aldermen and commons
severally as to the probable effect of the release of
the prisoners. This occurred in March, 1386, when it
was unanimously resolved that danger would result
to the city if Northampton was allowed to come
within 100 miles of it.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 198b.</p></note> The resolution caused much
annoyance to the duke, who characterised it as unreasonable
and outrageous, and led to some heated
correspondence.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A 27, membr. 26.</p></note> It had, however, the desired effect
of at least postponing the release of the prisoners.<note place="foot"><p>Letters patent of pardon received the king's sign manual on the
3 June, 1386 (Letter Book H, fo. 216), but the prisoners were not
released before April in the following year.&mdash;See Higden, Polychron.
ix, 93.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A book of ordinances, known as "Jubilee," burnt by order of
mayor, Exton, March, 1387.</note>

<p>A few months after Exton had taken Brembre's
place as mayor (Oct., 1386), the new mayor
raised a commotion by ordering a book called
"Jubilee," which Northampton is supposed to have
compiled&mdash;or caused to be compiled for the better
government of the City, to be publicly burnt in Guildhall
yard.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 214. (Memorials, p. 494).</p></note> The cordwainers of London, staunch
supporters of Northampton (the leader of the riot
which led to Northampton's arrest in 1384 was a
cordwainer), complained to parliament of Exton.
The book, said they, " comprised all the good
articles pertaining to the good government of the
City," which Exton and all the aldermen had sworn
to maintain for ever, and now he and his accomplices
had burnt it without consent of the commons, to the
annihilation of many good liberties, franchises, and<pb n="230" /><anchor id="Pg230" />
customs of the City.<note place="foot"><p>Rot. Parl. iii, 227, cited by Riley in his "Memorials," p. 494,
note.</p></note> The book had already been
subjected to revision in June, 1384, when Brembre
was mayor;<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 176b.</p></note> it was now utterly destroyed.</p>

<note place="margin">Further efforts to secure Northampton's release, 1387.</note>

<p>In 1387 efforts were again made to secure
Northampton's release, and this time with success.
On the 17th April Exton reported to the Common
Council that Lord Zouche was actually engaged in
canvassing the king for the release of Northampton
and his allies. The Council thereupon unanimously
resolved to send a letter to Lord Zouche, on behalf
of the entire commonalty of the City, praying him to
desist from his suit, and assuring him of their loyalty
to the king even unto death.<note place="foot"><p>This letter, which was dated the 27 April, was delivered to Lord
Zouche at his house by John Reche, Common Pleader, and Ralph
Strode and John Harwell, Sergeants-at-Arms.&mdash;Letter Book H, fo. 215b.</p></note> It also resolved to
send a deputation on horseback to the king, who was
at "Esthamstede," to ask his favour for the City, and
to beg of him not to annul the charters which he had
already given to the citizens, more especially as touching
the release of the prisoners in question.</p>

<note place="margin">Northampton set free, 27 April, 1387.</note>

<p>On the 4th May the Recorder, William Cheyne,
reported to the Common Council assembled in the
upper chamber of the Guildhall the result of the
interview with the king. The deputation had been
received most graciously, and the mayor had been
particularly successful in his speech, setting forth the
dangers that would inevitably ensue, both to the king
and to the city, if pardon were granted to Northampton
and his friends. The king had replied that he
would take good precautions for himself before he<pb n="231" /><anchor id="Pg231" /><index index="toc" level1="EFFORTS TO OBTAIN NORTHAMPTON'S RELEASE." />
granted them their liberty;<note place="foot"><p>"Super quo dominus Rex respondit quod licet in sua potestate
fuerat cum ipsis, Johanne, Johanne et Ricardo agere graciose bene
tamen sibi provideret priusquam foret eis graciam concessurus."&mdash;Letter
Book H, fo. 215b.</p></note> and with this answer
the citizens had to be content. The answer was an
evasive one, if it be true, as one authority states,
that on the 27th April&mdash;the day on which the mayor
had informed the citizens of the intervention of
Lord Zouche&mdash;Northampton had received his pardon
and been restored to his property.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 93.</p></note> His friends remained
still unsatisfied, and plagued the king for
more favourable terms to such a degree that Richard
ordered (7 Oct.) proclamation to be made in the city
against any further entreaties being made to him on
the subject.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 222.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Letter from the mayor to the king, 5 Oct.</note>

<p>Two days before the order for this proclamation,
the king was informed by letter of the nature of a
fresh oath of allegiance<note place="foot"><p>The oath as set out in the letter to the king differs from another
copy of the oath, which immediately precedes the letter in Letter Book H,
fos. 220b, 221; a clause having been subsequently added to the latter
to the effect that the swearer abjured the opinions of Northampton and
his followers, and would oppose their return within the bounds and limits
set out in the king's letters patent.</p></note> that had been taken by the
mayor, aldermen, and commonalty of the city. He
was furthermore exhorted to give credence to what
Nicholas Brembre might inform him as to the state
and government of the city, since there was no one
better informed than Brembre on the subject.</p>

<note place="margin">The king's reply, 7 Oct.</note>

<p>To this the king sent a gracious reply.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 222.</p></note> He had
learnt with much pleasure from Nicholas Brembre of
the allegiance of the citizens, which he trusted would<pb n="232" /><anchor id="Pg232" />
continue, as he would soon have good reason for paying
a visit to the city in person. He had heard that
the new sheriffs were good and trusty men, and he
expressed a hope that at the approaching election of a
mayor they would choose one of whom he could
approve, otherwise he would decline to receive the
mayor-elect at his presentation. He not only forbade
any further entreaties to be made to him touching
Northampton, More and Northbury, but commissioned
enquiry to be made as to their property in the city.
He was especially gratified to learn that, in accordance
with his request, they had appointed Thomas Usk (the
chief witness against Northampton) to the office of
under-sheriff, and promised that such appointment
should not be drawn into precedent. The citizens
were not slow to take the hint about the election of a
new mayor, and Exton was continued in office.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 223b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Parliament of 1386.</note>

<p>Great discontent had arisen meanwhile in the
country at the lavish expenditure of the king, without
any apparent result in victories abroad, such as had
been gained in the glorious days of his predecessor.
A cry for reform and retrenchment was raised, and
found a champion in the person of the Duke of Gloucester,
the youngest of the king's uncles. At his instigation,
the parliament which assembled on the 1st
October, 1386, demanded the dismissal of the king's
ministers, and read him a lesson on constitutional
government which ended in a threat of deposition
unless the king should mend his ways. Richard was at
the time only twenty-one years of age. In the impetuosity
of his youth he is recorded as having contemplated
a dastardly attempt upon the life of his uncle,<pb n="233" /><anchor id="Pg233" /><index index="toc" level1="DISAFFECTION TOWARDS THE KING." />
whom he had grown to hate as the cause of all his
difficulties. A plan was laid, which is said to have
received Brembre's approbation, for beguiling the duke
into the city by an invitation to supper, and then and
there making away with him, but the duke was forewarned.
The chronicler who records Brembre's complicity
in this nefarious design against Gloucester's life
also relates that Exton, who was mayor, refused to
have anything to do with it.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 150.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Appointment of a Commission of Regency.</note>

<note place="margin">The Commission declared illegal.</note>

<note place="margin">Richard applies to the City for assistance.</note>

<p>Before the end of the session, parliament had
appointed a commission, with Gloucester at its head,
to regulate the government of the country and the
king's household. This very naturally excited the
wrath of the hot-headed king, who immediately set to
work to form a party in opposition to the duke. In
August of the next year (1387) he obtained a declaration
from five of the justices to the effect that the
commission was illegal. On the 28th October he
sent the Archbishop of York and the Earl of Suffolk
into the city to learn whether he could depend upon
the support of the citizens. The answer could not
have been regarded as unfavourable, for, on the 10th
November, the king paid a personal visit to the city
and was received with great ceremony.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 104.</p></note> On the
following day (11 Nov.) orders were given to the
aldermen of the City to assemble the men of their
several wards, to see that they were suitably armed
according to their rank and estate, and to make a
return of the same in due course.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 223b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's advisers charged with treason, 14 Nov.</note>

<p>On the 14th Gloucester formally charged the
king's five counsellors&mdash;the Archbishop of York, the<pb n="234" /><anchor id="Pg234" />
Duke of Ireland, the Earl of Suffolk, Chief Justice
Tressilian and Nicholas Brembre, "the false London
knight," with treason.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 106; Walsingham, ii, 166.</p></note> The king retaliated by causing
proclamation to be made to the effect that he had
taken these same individuals under his own protection,
and that no one should harm them save at his
own peril. This protection was extended also to the
king's uncle, the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of
Arundel and Warwick, the impeaching parties.</p>

<note place="margin">The mayor and aldermen summoned to Windsor, 28 Nov.</note>

<p>On the 28th the mayor and aldermen were
summoned to proceed to Windsor forthwith, to consult
upon certain matters very weighty (<hi rend="font-style: italic">certeines
treschargeauntes matirs</hi>).<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 223b. (Memorials, p. 449.)</p></note> The City's archives contain
no record of what took place at the interview, but it
appears that the object of the conference was to ascertain
how many men-at-arms the city would be likely
to furnish the king at a crisis. The answer given by
the mayor was not encouraging; the citizens were
merchants and craftsmen, and not soldiers, save for
the defence of the city itself; and the mayor straightway
asked the king's permission to resign his office.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 108-109.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richard obliged to submit.</note>

<note place="margin">Flight of the accused.</note>

<p>Finding that he could not rely on any assistance
from the Londoners&mdash;whom Walsingham describes as
fickle as a reed, siding at one time with the lords and
at another time with the king<note place="foot"><p>"Londonienses ... mobiles erant ut arundo, et nunc cum
Dominis, nunc cum Rege, sentiebant, nusquam stabiles sed fallaces."&mdash;Hist.
Angliæ, ii, 161.</p></note>&mdash;Richard was driven
to temporise. He had already promised that in the
next parliament his unfortunate advisers should be
called to account, but long before parliament met<pb n="235" /><anchor id="Pg235" /><index index="toc" level1="THE LORDS APPELLANT IN THE CITY." />
(3 Feb., 1388), four out of the five culprits had made
good their escape&mdash;at least for a time. Brembre alone
was taken.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 108; Walsingham, ii, 169.</p></note> He had anticipated the blow by making
over all his property at home and abroad to certain
parties by deed, dated the 15th October, 1387, no
doubt, upon a secret trust.<note place="foot"><p>Pleas and Mem., Roll A, membr. 7.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The lords appellant admitted into the city, Dec., 1387.</note>

<p>Notwithstanding the evident coolness of the
citizens towards him, Richard determined to leave
Windsor and spend Christmas at the Tower. He would
be safer there, and less subject to the dominating
influence of the Duke of Gloucester and the Earls of
Arundel, Nottingham, Warwick and Derby, who objected
to his shaking off the fetters of the commission.
As soon as his intention was known, these five lords&mdash;who,
from having been associated in appealing against
Richard's counsellors, were styled "appellant"&mdash;hastened
to London, and drawing up their forces outside
the city's walls, demanded admittance. After some
little hesitation, the mayor determined to admit them,
defending his action to the king by declaring that they
were his true liege men and friends of the realm.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 111-114; Walsingham, ii, 170, 171; Engl. Chron.
(Camd. Soc. No. 64), p. 5.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The lords at the Guildhall, 18 Jan., 1388.</note>

<p>On the 18th January, 1388, the lords appeared at
the Guildhall, accompanied by the Archbishop, the
Bishops of Ely, Hereford, Exeter, and others. The
Archbishop absolved the citizens of their oaths of
allegiance, whilst the Bishop of Ely, the lord treasurer,
deprecated any remarks made to the disparagement
of the lords. The lords and the bishops had been
indicted on an iniquitous charge, and there were some<pb n="236" /><anchor id="Pg236" />
among the citizens who had been similarly indicted,
but whether justly or unjustly he (the bishop) could
not say. That would be decided by parliament. In
the meantime they were ready to assist in settling the
trade disputes in the city, for it was absurd for one
body of the citizens to attempt to exterminate another.
The citizens, however, showed no desire to accept the
proffered mediation.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 117, 118.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Trial of Brembre before parliament, Feb., 1388.</note>

<p>When parliament met (3 Feb.), a formidable
indictment of thirty-nine charges was laid against
the king's late advisers, of whom Brembre alone
appeared. On the 17th February, he was brought up
by the constable of the Tower, and was called on to
answer off-hand the several charges of treason alleged
against him. He prayed for time to take counsel's
advice. This being refused, he claimed to support his
cause by wager of battle, and immediately the whole
company of lords, knights, esquires, and commons,
flung down their gages so thick, we are told, that they
"seemed like snow on a winter's day."<note place="foot"><p>Howell's State Trials, i, 115.</p></note> But the
lords declared that wager by battle did not lie in such
a case. When the trial was resumed on the following
day, so much opposition arose between the king, who
spoke strongly in Brembre's favour, and the lords,
that it was decided to leave the question of the
prisoner's guilt or innocence to a commission of lords,
who, to the surprise and annoyance of the majority
of the nobles, brought in a verdict of not guilty.
Brembre was not to be allowed thus to escape. The
lords sent for two representatives of the various crafts
of the city to depose as to Brembre's guilt; but even<pb n="237" /><anchor id="Pg237" />
so, the lords failed to get any definite verdict. At
last they sent for the mayor, recorder, and some of
the aldermen (<hi rend="font-style: italic">seniores</hi>) to learn what they had to say
about the accused.</p>

<note place="margin">Conviction and sentence of death.</note>

<p>One would have thought that with Nicholas
Exton, his old friend and ally, to speak up for him,
Brembre's life would now at least be saved, even if
he were not altogether acquitted. It was not so,
however. The mayor and aldermen were asked as
to their <hi rend="font-style: italic">opinion</hi> (not as to their knowledge), whether
Brembre was cognisant of certain matters, and they
gave it as their <hi rend="font-style: italic">opinion</hi> that Brembre was more
likely to have been cognisant of them than not.
Turning then to the Recorder, the lords asked him
how stood the law in such a case? To which he
replied, that a man who knew such things as were
laid to Brembre's charge, and knowing them failed to
reveal them, deserved death. On such evidence as
this, Brembre was convicted on the 20th February,
and condemned to be executed.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 168.</p></note> He was drawn on a
hurdle through the city to Tyburn, showing himself
very penitent and earnestly desiring all persons to pray
for him. At the last moment he confessed that his
conduct towards Northampton had been vile and
wicked. Whilst craving pardon of Northampton's
son "he was suddenly turned off, and the executioner
cutting his throat, he died."<note place="foot"><p>State Trials, i, 118, 119.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Character of Brembre as depicted by Walsingham.</note>

<p>If we are to believe all that Walsingham records of
Brembre, the character and conduct of the city alderman
and ex-mayor was bad indeed. Besides conniving
at the plot laid against Gloucester's life, which<pb n="238" /><anchor id="Pg238" />
involved the grossest breach of hospitality, he is
recorded as having lain in wait with an armed force
at the Mews near Charing Cross, to intercept and
massacre the lords on their way to Westminster, to
effect an arrangement with the king, as well as having
entertained the idea of cutting the throats of a number
of his fellow-citizens, and placing himself at the head
of the government of the city, the name of which he
proposed changing to that of "Little Troy."<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 165-174.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Deaths of Tressilian and Uske.</note>

<p>Of Brembre's associates, Tressilian was captured
during the trial, torn from the Sanctuary at Westminster,
and hanged on the 19th. Another to share
the same fate was Thomas Uske, who had been one
of the chief witnesses against Northampton. He was
sentenced to death by parliament on the 4th March,
and died asseverating to the last that he had done
Northampton no injury, but that every word he had
deposed against him the year before was absolutely
true.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 167-169.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The proceedings of the "merciless" parliament confirmed by oath.</note>

<p>The lords appellant, who were now complete
masters of the situation, insisted upon the proceedings
of this "merciless" parliament, as its opponents
called it, being ratified by oath administered to
prelates, knights, and nobles of the realm, as well as
to the mayor, aldermen, and chief burgesses of every
town. On the 4th June&mdash;the day parliament rose&mdash;a
writ was issued in Richard's name, enjoining the
administration of this oath to those aldermen and
citizens of London who had not been present in
parliament when the oath was administered there.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 228.</p></note></p>

<pb n="239" /><anchor id="Pg239" /><index index="toc" level1="RE-APPEARANCE OF NORTHAMPTON." />

<note place="margin">Party spirit in the city, 1388-1389.</note>

<p>In the meantime the continued jealousy existing
among the city guilds&mdash;the Mercers, Goldsmiths,
Drapers, and others, objecting to Fishmongers and
Vintners taking any part in the government of the
city on the ground that they were victuallers, and as
such forbidden by an ordinance passed when
Northampton was mayor to hold any municipal
office<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo, 161.</p></note>&mdash;had led parliament (14 May) to proclaim free
trade throughout the kingdom.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.,</hi> fo. 126; Higden ix, 179.</p></note> A party in the city
tried to get parliament to remove Exton from the
mayoralty on the ground of his having connived at
the curtailment of the City's liberties and franchises.
The attempt, however, failed, and he remained in
office until succeeded by Nicholas Twyford (Oct.,
1388).<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fos. 234, 234b.</p></note> Although Twyford belonged to the party of
Northampton as distinguished from that of Brembre
and Exton, his election raised little or no opposition,
such as had been anticipated. When he went out of
office in October, 1389, however, party strife in the
city again showed itself. The majority of the citizens
voted William Venour, a grocer, into the
mayoralty, but the choice was strongly opposed by
the Goldsmiths, the Mercers, and the Drapers, who
ran another candidate, one of their own body, Adam
Bamme, a goldsmith.<note place="foot"><p>Higden ix, 217.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The return of Northampton to the city, 1390.</note>

<p>Some months before the close of Twyford's
mayoralty, Richard had succeeded in gaining his
independence (May, 1389), which he was induced by
Lancaster, on his return after a prolonged absence
abroad, to exercise at length in favour of Northampton,
by permitting him once more to return to London,<pb n="240" /><anchor id="Pg240" />
although only as a stranger.<note place="foot"><p>Higden ix, 238, 239.</p></note> This was in July.
In December, letters patent granting him a free
pardon were issued, containing no such restriction.<note place="foot"><p>Letters patent, date, 2 Dec, 1390.&mdash;Letter Book H, fo. 255;
Higden ix, 243.</p></note>
His re-appearance in the streets of the city revived
the old party spirit, and Adam Bamme, who had
succeeded Venour in the mayoralty, found it expedient
to forbid all discussion of the rights and the
wrongs of the several parties of Northampton and
Brembre on pain of imprisonment.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 259. (Memorials, p. 526.).</p></note> Four more
years elapsed before Northampton was re-instated in
the freedom of the city.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 300.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proclamation enforcing knighthood, Feb., 1392.</note>

<p>For some years Richard governed not unwisely.
In 1392, however, he quarrelled with the city. Early
in that year he called upon every inhabitant, whose
property for the last three years was worth £40 in
land or rent, to take upon himself the honour of
knighthood. The sheriffs, Henry Vanner and John
Shadworth, made a return that all tenements and
rents in the city were held of the king <hi rend="font-style: italic">in capite</hi> as
fee burgage at a fee farm (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ad feodi firmam</hi>); that
by reason of the value of tenements varying from
time to time, and many of them requiring repair from
damage by fire and tempest, their true annual value
could not be ascertained, and that, therefore, it was
impossible to make a return of those who possessed
£40 of land or rent as desired.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 270.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The mayor summoned to Nottingham, June, 1392.</note>

<p>This answer was anything but agreeable to the
king. But he had other cause just now for being<pb n="241" /><anchor id="Pg241" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY REFUSES A LOAN TO RICHARD." />
offended with the city. Being in want of money, he
had offered a valuable jewel to the citizens as security
for a loan, and the citizens had excused themselves on
the plea that they were not so well off as they used
to be, since foreigners had been allowed to enjoy the
same privileges in the city as themselves. Having
failed in this quarter, the king had resorted to a
Lombard, who soon was able to accommodate him;
but when the king learnt on enquiry that the money so
obtained had been advanced to the Lombard merchant
by the very citizens who had refused to lend it
to the king himself, his anger knew no bounds,<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 270. According to Walsingham (Hist. Angl. ii, 208),
the Lombard failed to get the money from the citizens, who nearly
killed him when they learnt his purpose.</p></note> and
he summoned John Hende, the mayor, the sheriffs, the
aldermen, and twenty-four of the chief citizens<note place="foot"><p>The names of the citizens chosen for the occasion are given by
Higden (Polychron. ix, 269, 270), and in Letter Book H, fo. 270.</p></note> of the
City to attend him in June, at Nottingham. They
accordingly set out on their journey on the 19th June,
and arrived in Nottingham on the 23rd; the government
of the city being left in the meanwhile in the
hands of William Staundon. On the 25th they appeared
before the lords of the council, when the
chancellor rated them roundly for paying so little
attention to the king's writ&mdash;the writ touching knighthood&mdash;and
complained of the defective manner in
which the city was governed.<note place="foot"><p>The reason given in the City Records for the dismissals which
followed is stated to be "certain defects in a commission under the
common seal and other causes."&mdash;Letter Book H, fo. 270b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The mayor and sheriffs committed to prison, June, 1392.</note>

<p>He thereupon dismissed the mayor from office,
committing him to Windsor Castle. The sheriffs were
likewise dismissed, one being sent to Odyham Castle,<pb n="242" /><anchor id="Pg242" />
and the other to the Castle of Wallingford. The rest
of the citizens were ordered to return home.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, Polychron. ix, 272; Walsingham, ii, 208-209.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Sir Edward Dalyngrigge appointed warden of the city, July, 1392.</note>

<p>At nine o'clock in the morning of the 1st July,
Sir Edward Dalyngrigge appeared in the Guildhall,
and there, before an immense assembly of the commons,
read the king's commissions appointing him
warden of the city and the king's escheator. The
deposed sheriffs were succeeded by Gilbert Maghfeld,
or Maunfeld, and Thomas Newton, who remained in
office, by the king's appointment,<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 273; Letter Book H, fo. 270b.</p></note> until the end of
the year, when they were re-elected, the one by the
warden and the other by the citizens.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 275b.</p></note> Dalyngrigge
was soon afterwards succeeded in the office of warden
by Sir Baldwin de Radyngton.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 273.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City fined £100,000, July, 1392.</note>

<p>By way of inflicting further punishment upon the
citizens, Richard had already removed the King's
Bench and Exchequer from London to York;<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 269b; Higden, ix, 267. Walsingham (ii, 213)
suggests that this was done at the instance of the Archbishop of York,
the Chancellor.</p></note> but the
removal proved so much more prejudicial to the
nation at large than to the City of London that the
courts were soon brought back.<note place="foot"><p>"Putabant isti officiarii per hoc non modicum damnificare civitatem
Lundoniæ, sed potius hoc multo majora damna intulerunt regi et
hominibus regni quam jam dictæ civitati."&mdash;Higden, ix, 267-268.</p></note> He would even
have waged open war on them had he dared.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 210.</p></note>
Instead of proceeding to this extremity, he summoned
the aldermen and 400 commoners to Windsor<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 273.</p></note>
and fined the City £100,000. This was in July (1392).<pb n="243" /><anchor id="Pg243" /><index index="toc" level1="FARRINGDON WARD&mdash;WITHIN AND WITHOUT." />
In August the king notified his intention of passing
through the city on his way from Shene to Westminster.
The citizens embraced the opportunity of
giving him a magnificent reception, which the king
acknowledged in the following month by restoring to
them their liberties and setting free their late mayor
and sheriffs.<note place="foot"><p>Letters Patent of pardon, dated Woodstock, 19 September, 1392.
Preserved at the Guildhall (Box No. 6).</p></note> The fine of £100,000 recently imposed,
as well as other moneys which the king considered to
be due to him from the city, were also remitted.<note place="foot"><p>Higden. ix, 274, 276, 278; Letter Book H, fos. 271b, 272, 274.
Notwithstanding these remissions, the city was mulcted, according to
Waisingham (ii, 211), in no less a sum than £10,000 before it received
its liberties.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Chron. of London, 1089-1483 (ed. by Sir H. Nicolas,
sometimes called "Tyrrell's Chronicle," from a City Remembrancer of
that name), p. 80.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Municipal reforms, 1393.</note>

<p>Once more restored to their liberties, the citizens
in the following year (1393), with the assent of parliament,
effected a reform in the internal government
of the city which the increasing population had
rendered necessary. The Ward of Farringdon Within
and Without had increased so much in wealth and
population that it was deemed advisable to divide it
into two parts, each part having its own alderman.
Accordingly, in the following March (1394), Drew
Barantyn was elected Alderman of Farringdon Within,
whilst John Fraunceys was elected for Farringdon
Without. A more important reform effected at the
same time was the appointment of aldermen for life
instead of for a year only.<note place="foot"><p>Stat. 17, Ric. II, c. 13; Letter Book H, fos. 290b, 291.; Bohun,
"Privilegia Londini" (ed. 1723), p. 57.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Change of conduct on the part of Richard, 1394-1398.</note>

<p>In the following year (1394) the queen&mdash;Anne
of Bohemia&mdash;died. She had always shown a friendly
disposition towards the city, and it was mainly owing<pb n="244" /><anchor id="Pg244" />
to her intercession that Richard had restored its
liberties.<note place="foot"><p>Higden, ix, 274.</p></note> Her death removed one good influence
about Richard, and marks a change of policy or of
character.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., ii, 489-490.</p></note> His second marriage in 1396 did not improve
matters. In that year the mayor, Adam
Bamme, died in office, and instead of allowing the
citizens freely to elect a successor, he thrust upon
them Richard Whitington.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 314.</p></note> He arrested the Duke of
Gloucester and the Earls of Warwick and Arundel,
and otherwise behaved so outrageously as to raise
doubts as to his sanity. He gave out that he was
afraid to appear in public for fear of the Londoners;
but this was only a ruse for the purpose of raising
money.<note place="foot"><p>Engl. Chron. (Camd. Soc. No. 64), p. 12.</p></note> Like Edward II, he borrowed money from
anybody and everybody, and often resorted to unconstitutional
measures to fill his purse. He made the
nobles and his wealthier subjects sign blank cheques
for him to fill up at his pleasure.<note place="foot"><p>"Also this yere (1397-8), by selying of blank chartres, the Citie
of London paied to the kyng a m<hi rend="vertical-align: super">l</hi> li."&mdash;Chron. of London (ed. by Sir
H. Nicolas); p. 83.</p></note> These cheques, or
"charters" as they were called, were afterwards
burnt by order of his successor on the throne.</p>

<note place="margin">The landing of Henry of Lancaster, July, 1399.</note>

<p>A crisis was fast approaching. The Duke of
Hereford, whom the king had banished, and who, on
the death of his father "time honoured Lancaster,"
succeeded to the title early in 1399, was prevailed
upon to return to England and strike a blow for the
recovery of his inheritance which Richard had seized.
Richard, as if infatuated, took this inopportune<pb n="245" /><anchor id="Pg245" />
moment to sail to Ireland. Before setting out he
made a last bid for the favour of the citizens by
again granting them permission to rule the fish trade
according to ancient custom.<note place="foot"><p>Letters Patent, dat. 9 May, 1399.&mdash;Letter Book H, fo. 326.
Richard set sail on the 29th.</p></note> It was too late; they
had already resolved to throw in their lot with
Henry of Lancaster.</p>

<p>As soon as Henry had landed at Ravenspur (4th
July) a special messenger was despatched to the city
with the news. The mayor was in bed, but he
hurriedly rose and took steps to proclaim Henry's
arrival in England. "Let us apparel ourselves and go
and receive the Duke of Lancaster, since we agreed to
send for him," was the resolution of those to whom
the mayor conveyed the first tidings; and accordingly
Drew Barentyn, who had succeeded Whitington in
October, 1398, and 500 other citizens, took horse to
meet the duke, whom they escorted to the city. The
day that Henry entered the city was kept as a
holiday, "as though it had been the day for the
celebration of Easter."</p>

<note place="margin">Richard's surrender and deposition from the crown.</note>

<p>When Richard heard of Henry's landing he
hurried back from Ireland. He was met by the duke
with a large force, which comprised 1,200 Londoners,
fully armed and horsed.<note place="foot"><p>"Douze cent hommes de Londres, tous armés et montés à
cheval."&mdash;Froissart (ed. Lyon, 1559), vol. iv, c. 108, p. 328. In Lord
Berner's translation of Froissart (iv, 566), the number is wrongly given
as 12,000.</p></note> Finding resistance hopeless,
the king made submission, craving only that he might
be protected from the Londoners, who, he was convinced,
bore him no good will. He was, in consequence,
secretly conveyed to the Tower under cover<pb n="246" /><anchor id="Pg246" />
of night. Articles were drawn up accusing him of
misgovernment, and publicly read in the Guildhall.
Four of his advisers and supporters, whose names he
gave up, hoping to gain favour for himself thereby,
were executed at a fishmonger's stall in Cheapside.
Sentence of deposition was passed against him, and
Lancaster proclaimed king in his stead under the title
of King Henry IV.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="247" /><anchor id="Pg247" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER X.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="DOUBTFUL REPORTS AS TO THE LATE KING'S DEATH." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">Doubtful reports as to the late king's death.</note>

<p>The sentence passed on the late king proved his
death warrant; his haughty spirit broke down, and
he died at Pontefract the following year. According
to Henry's account he died of wilful starvation.
There were many, however, who believed him to
have been put to death by Henry's orders; whilst
others, on the contrary, refused to believe his death
had actually taken place at all, notwithstanding the
fact of the corpse having been purposely exposed to
public view throughout its journey from Pontefract to
London.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 245, 246.</p></note> This belief that Richard was still alive was
fostered by many, and, among others, by William
Serle. He had been at one time the late king's
chamberlain, and he kept up the delusion of Richard
being still in the land of the living, by exhibiting
the late king's signet, which had come into his possession.
Serle was eventually arrested in the north
of England and brought to London, to be executed
at Tyburn.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 262-264. Serle's Christian name is given elsewhere
as John.&mdash;Eng. Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 64), p. 30. The writ
for his execution is dated 5 August, 1404.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 31b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The "Trumpington" Conspiracy, 1416-1420.</note>

<p>Sixteen years later (1416), a certain Thomas
Warde, called "Trumpyngtone," personated the late
king, and a scheme was laid for placing him on the
throne with the aid of Sigismund, king of the Romans<pb n="248" /><anchor id="Pg248" />
Sigismund, however, refused to have anything to do
with the plot, which was hatched within the city's
liberties by Benedict Wolman and Thomas Bekering.
The conspiracy having been discovered, its authors
were thrown into prison. One died before trial, the
other paid the penalty for his rashness with his head.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 180b. (Memorials, pp. 638-641). Walsingham,
ii, 317.</p></note>
In August, 1420, long after Trumpington was dead,
two others, Thomas Cobold and William Bryan,
endeavoured still to keep up the delusion in the city.
The mayor, Whitington, himself ordered their arrest.
Bryan had time to escape from the house of William
Norton, a barber given to Lollardry, where he and
his fellow conspirator were lodged. Cobold tried to
hide himself, but was discovered cunningly concealed
in the house, and taken before the mayor and aldermen.
Being questioned as to the identity of Trumpington
and the late king, he gave an evasive reply,
adding, that the question of identity had become
immaterial since Trumpington had been dead some
time. Cobold was thought to be too dangerous a
man to be allowed at large, so he was committed to
prison.<note place="foot"><p>City Records Journal, I, fo. 83b. We have now a series of MS.
Volumes among the City's archives known as "Journals" to assist us.
They contain minutes of proceedings of the Court of Common Council,
just as the "Repertories" (which we shall have occasion to consult
later on), contain a record of the proceedings of the Court of Aldermen.
The Letter Books may now be regarded as "fair copies" of the more
important of the proceedings of both Courts.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proceedings against the Lollards.</note>

<p>In the meantime Wycliffe had died (1384), and
Lollardry had become only another name for general
discontentment. The clergy made strenuous efforts to
suppress the Lollards. Pope Boniface had invoked
the assistance of the late king (1395) to destroy these<pb n="249" /><anchor id="Pg249" /><index index="toc" level1="THE STATUTE OF HERESY." />
"tares" (<hi rend="font-style: italic">lolium aridum</hi>) that had sprung up amidst the
wheat which remained constant to church and king,
and called upon the mayor and commonalty of the
city to use their interest with Richard to the same
end.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book H, fo. 307b. The Lollards are said to have derived
their name from a low German word <hi rend="font-style: italic">lollen</hi>, to sing or chant, from their
habit of chanting, but their clerical opponents affected to derive it from
the Latin <hi rend="font-style: italic">lolium</hi>, as if this sect were as tares among the true wheat of
the church.</p></note> Besides seeking the support of the commonalty
against the powerful nobles, the new king sought the
support of the church, and he had not been long on
the throne before he issued commissions for search to
be made in the city for Lollards, and for the arrest of
all preachers found sowing the pestilential seed of
Lollardry (<hi rend="font-style: italic">semen pestiferum lollardrie</hi>).<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 125b-132.</p></note> Early in
1401 a price was put upon the head of the captain
and leader of the sect, Sir John Oldcastle, otherwise
known as Lord Cobham. Public proclamation was
made in the city, that any one giving information
which should lead to his arrest should be rewarded
with 500 marks; any one actually arresting or causing
him to be arrested should receive double that amount,
whilst the citizens and burgesses of any city or
borough who should take and produce him before
the king, should be for ever quit of all taxes, talliages,
tenths, fifteenths and other assessments.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 130b.</p></note> Not only
were conventicles forbidden, but no one was allowed
to visit the ordinary churches after nine o'clock at
night or before five o'clock in the morning.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ibid.</hi></p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The statute of heresy, 1401.</note>

<p>Still the clergy were not satisfied. The ecclesiastical
courts could condemn men as heretics, but
they had no power to burn them. Accordingly, a
statute was passed this year (1401), known as the<pb n="250" /><anchor id="Pg250" />
statute of heresy (<hi rend="font-style: italic">de hæretico comburendo</hi>), authorising
the ecclesiastical courts to hand over to the civil
powers any heretic refusing to recant, or relapsing
after recantation, so that he might pay the penalty of
being publicly burnt before the people.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 11b.</p></note> It was the
first English law passed for the suppression of religious
opinion, and its first victim is said to have been one
William Sautre, formerly a parish priest of Norfolk.<note place="foot"><p>He appears, however, to have burnt by a special order of the king,
before the passing of the statute.&mdash;See Fasc. Zizan. (Rolls Series No. 5),
Introd. p. lxix.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's other troubles.</note>

<p>Henry had other difficulties to face besides
opposition from the nobles. France had refused to
acknowledge his title to the crown, and demanded
the restoration of Richard's widow, a mere child of
eleven. The Scots<note place="foot"><p>A curious story is told of boys in the streets playing at England
and Scotland at this time, with the result that what began in play
ended in fighting and loss of life.&mdash;See Chron. Mon. S. Albani (Rolls
Series No. 28, 3), p. 332.</p></note> and the Welsh were on the point
of engaging in open insurrection. Invasion was
imminent; the exchequer was empty, and the
Londoners appealed to could offer no more than a
paltry loan of 4,000 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 16.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Supplies granted by parliament in 1404.</note>

<p>As time went on, Henry had to try new methods
for raising money. The parliament which met at the
opening of 1404, granted the king a 1<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> in the
pound on all lands, tenements and rents, besides
20<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> for every knight's fee. The money so raised
was not, however, to be at the disposal of the
king's own ministers, but was to be placed in the
hands of four officials to be known as treasurers of
war (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Guerrarum Thesaurarii</hi>). The names of the<pb n="251" /><anchor id="Pg251" />
treasurers elected for the purpose are given as John
Owdeby, clerk, John Hadley, Thomas Knolles, and
Richard Merlawe, citizens of London.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 27; Chron. Mon. S. Albani (Rolls Series
No. 28, 3), p. 379.</p></note> Three of
these were citizens of note. Hadley had already
served as mayor in 1393, Knolles had filled the same
office in 1399, and was re-elected in 1410, whilst
Merlawe was destined to attain that honour both in
1409 and 1417.</p>

<note place="margin">More city loans in 1409 &amp; 1412.</note>

<p>It was during Merlawe's first mayoralty that
the citizens advanced to the king the sum of 7,000
marks,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 89b.</p></note> to enable him to complete the reduction of
Wales, which his son, the Prince of Wales, had
already nearly accomplished. In 1412 they advanced
a further sum of 10,000 marks.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 113.</p></note> At the beginning of
that year a commission was addressed by Henry to
Robert Chichele, the mayor, brother of the archbishop
of the same name, to the sheriffs of the city, to
Richard Whitington and Thomas Knolles, the late
mayor, instructing them to make a return of the
amount of land and tenements held in the city and
suburbs, with the view of levying 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> on every
£20 annual rent by virtue of an act passed by the
late parliament.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 108b.</p></note> A return was made to the effect
that it was very difficult to discover the true value of
lands and tenements in the city and suburbs, owing to
absence of tenants and dilapidations by fire and
water, but that they had caused enquiry to be made,
and the names of men, women and other persons
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">hominum, feminarum et aliarum personarum</hi>) mentioned
in the commission were forwarded by them in<pb n="252" /><anchor id="Pg252" />
the following a, b, c (<hi rend="font-style: italic">in sequenti a, b, c</hi>). What lands
and tenements the "men, women and other persons"
had elsewhere they had no means of discovering.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 112b.</p></note>
The schedule, or "a, b, c," is not entered in the City
Letter Book, but is to be found among the Exchequer
Rolls, preserved at Her Majesty's Public Record<note place="foot"><p>Exchequer Roll, Lay Subsidy, 144-20.&mdash;See Archæological
Journal, vol. xliv, 56-82.</p></note>
Office. The gross rental was returned at £4,220, and
the sum paid into the exchequer at 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> for every
£20, under the provisions of the act amounted to
£70 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> The mayor and commonalty of the city
are credited as possessing lands, tenements and rents
of an annual value of no more than £150 9<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 11<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>,
whilst the Bridge House Estate was returned at
£148 15<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 3<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> Of the livery companies, the Goldsmiths
appear as the owners of the largest property,
their rental of city property amounting to
£46 10<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 1/2<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, the Merchant Tailors following them
closely with £44 3<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 7<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> The Mercers had but a
rental of £13 18<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> whilst the Skinners had
£18 12<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> Robert Chichele, the mayor, was
already a rich man, with an annual rental of
£42 19<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, derived from city property, or nearly
double the amount (£25) with which Richard
Whitington was credited.</p>

<note place="margin">Whitington mayor for the third time, 1406.</note>

<p>Whitington had already three times occupied the
mayoralty chair; once (in 1396) at the word of a
king, and twice (in 1397 and 1406) at the will of his
fellow citizens. On the occasion of his third election
a solemn mass was for the first time introduced into
the proceedings, the mayor, aldermen and a large<pb n="253" /><anchor id="Pg253" /><index index="toc" level1="RICHARD WHITTINGTON, MAYOR." />
body of commoners attending the service at the
Guildhall Chapel, before proceeding to the election.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 54. (Memorials pp. 563-564.)</p></note>
The custom which then sprang up continues in a
modified form to this day, the election of a
mayor being always preceded by divine service. Its
origin may perhaps be ascribed in some measure to
the spirit of Lollardry which, in its best sense, found
much favour with the citizens.</p>

<p>The enormous wealth which he succeeded in amassing
was bestowed in promoting the cause of education,
and in relieving the sufferings of the poor and
afflicted. He built a handsome library in the house of
the Grey Friars and also the Church of Saint Michael
in the "Riole." He is credited by some writers with
having purchased and presented to the corporation
the advowson of the Church of St. Peter upon
Cornhill. But this is probably a mistake arising from
the fact of a license in mortmain having been granted
by Henry IV to Richard Whitington, John Hende,
and others, to convey the manor of Leadenhall,
together with the advowsons of the several churches
of Saint Peter upon Cornhill and Saint Margaret
Patyns, held of the king in free burgage, to the mayor
and commonalty of the City of London and their
successors.<note place="foot"><p>License, dated Westminster, 29 May, 12 Henry IV (<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">A.D.</hi> 1411).&mdash;Letter
Book I, fo. 103b. In 1417 the mayor and aldermen ordained
that the rector of St. Peter's for the time being should in future take
precedence of the rectors of all other city churches, on the ground
that Saint Peter's was the first church founded in the city of London,
having been built in 199 by King Lucius, and for 400 years or more
held the metropolitan chair.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 203. (Memorials,
pp. 651-653.) <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Journal 1, fo. 21b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Further proceedings against Oldcastle and the Lollards, 1413.</note>

<p>On the accession of Henry V, Archbishop Arundel,
whom Walsingham describes as the most eminent<pb n="254" /><anchor id="Pg254" />
bulwark and indomitable supporter of the church,<note place="foot"><p>"Eminentissima turris Ecclesiæ Anglicanæ et pugil invictus
Dominus Thomas de Arundelia."&mdash;Hist. Angl. ii, 300.</p></note>
renewed his attack on the Lollards, and endeavoured
to serve Oldcastle with a citation. Failing to accomplish
this he caused him to be arrested. The bold
defence made by the so-called heretic, when before his
judges, gained additional weight from the reputation
he enjoyed for high moral character. Nevertheless
he was adjudged guilty of the charges brought against
him. A formal sentence of excommunication was
passed, and he was remitted to the Tower for forty
days in the hope that at the expiration of that time
he might be found willing to retract. This, however,
was not to be.</p>

<note place="margin">Meeting of Lollards in St. Giles' Fields, 12 Jan., 1414.</note>

<p>He contrived to make his escape from prison,<note place="foot"><p>A certain William Fyssher, a <hi rend="font-style: italic">parchemyner</hi> or parchment-maker
of London, was afterwards (1416) convicted of assisting in Oldcastle's
escape, and was executed at Tyburn.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 181b. (Memorials,
p. 641.)</p></note>
and shortly afterwards appeared at the head of a
number of followers in St. Giles's Fields. Great disappointment
was felt at not receiving the assistance
that had been expected from city servants and
apprentices. According to Walsingham, no less than
5,000 men, comprising masters as well as servants,
from the city, were prepared to join the insurgents,
had not the king taken precautions to secure the
gates. As soon as it was discovered that the
young king had made ample preparations to meet
attack, the Lollards took to flight. Many, however,
failed to make good their escape, and nearly forty
paid the penalty of their rashness with their lives.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 292-299; Fasc. Zizan. (Rolls Series No. 5),
433-449; Chron. of London (ed. by Sir H. Nicolas), p. 97.</p></note><pb n="255" /><anchor id="Pg255" />
Walsingham was probably misinformed as to the
number of the persons who were prepared to assist
the Lollards. The fact is that, to the respectable
City burgess, Lollardism was a matter of less moment
than was the scandalous life led by the chantry priest
and other ministers of religion, and this the civic
authorities were determined to rectify as far as in
them lay. Between the years 1400 and 1440, some
sixty clerks in holy orders were taken in adultery
and clapt into prison by ward beadles.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fos. 286-290.</p></note> Nevertheless
the clergy, and more especially the chantry priest,
continued to live a life of luxury and sloth, oftentimes
spending the day in dicing, card playing, cock fighting
and frequenting taverns.</p>

<note place="margin">The last Statute against the Lollards, 1414.</note>

<p>The recent abortive attempt of Oldcastle gave
rise to another Statute against the Lollards,<note place="foot"><p>2 Hen. V. Stat. i, c. 7.</p></note> by which
the secular power, no longer content with merely
carrying into execution the sentences pronounced by
ecclesiastical courts, undertook, where necessary, the
initiative against heretics. Archbishop Arundel, the
determined enemy of the Lollards, had had no hand
in framing this Statute&mdash;the last that was enacted
against them.<note place="foot"><p>It was not, however, the last occasion upon which parliamentary
action was attempted. In 1422, and again in 1425, the Lollards were
formidable in London, and parliament on both occasions ordered that
those who were in prison should be delivered at once to the Ordinary,
in accordance with the provisions of this Statute.&mdash;Stubbs, Const.
Hist., iii, 81, 363.</p></note> He had died a few months before
parliament met, and had been succeeded by Henry
Chichele.</p>

<note place="margin">The king's offer of pardon refused by Oldcastle, 1415.</note>

<p>Early in the following year (1415) the king made
an offer of pardon to Oldcastle, who was still at large,
if he would come in and make submission before<pb n="256" /><anchor id="Pg256" />
Easter.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 147.</p></note> Instead of accepting so generous an offer,
Oldcastle busied himself in preparing for another rising
to take place as soon as the king should have set sail
on his meditated expedition to France. Lollard manifestoes
again appeared on the doors of the London
churches; whilst Oldcastle himself scoured the country
for recruits, to serve under a banner on which the
most sacred emblems of the church were depicted.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 306, 307.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Trial and execution of Cleydon, a Lollard, 1415.</note>

<p>In August (1415) another Lollard, John Cleydone
by name, a currier by trade, was tried in St.
Paul's Church before the new Archbishop and others,
the civic authorities having taken the initiative
according to the provisions of the recent Statute,
and arrested him on suspicion of being a heretic.
The mayor himself was a witness at the trial, and
testified as to the nature of certain books found in
Cleydon's possession; they were "the worst and the
most perverse that ever he did read or see." Walsingham,
who styles Cleydon "an inveterate Lollard"
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">quidam inveteratus Lollardus</hi>), adds, with his usual
acerbity against the entire sect, that the accused
had gone so far as to make his own son a priest, and
have Mass celebrated by him in his own house on
the occasion when his wife should have gone to
church, after rising from childbed.<note place="foot"><p>Hist. Angl., ii, 307.</p></note> Having been
convicted of heresy by the ecclesiastical court, the
prisoner was again delivered over to the secular
authorities for punishment.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fol. 154.</p></note> Both he and his books
were burnt.<note place="foot"><p>See letter from the mayor to the king, giving an account of Cleydon's
trial, 22nd August, 1415.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 155. (Memorials,
p. 617). Foxe, "Acts and Monuments," iii, 531-534.</p></note></p>

<pb n="257" /><anchor id="Pg257" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MAYOR'S PRECEDENCE IN THE CITY." />

<note place="margin">Oldcastle taken and executed, 1417.</note>

<p>Two years later Oldcastle himself was captured in
Wales and brought to London. At his trial he publicly
declared his belief that Richard II was still alive;
he was even fanatic enough to believe that he himself
would soon rise again from the dead.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 327, 328.</p></note> He was sentenced
to be hanged and burnt on the gallows, a
sentence which was carried out in St. Giles's Fields.<note place="foot"><p>Engl. Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 64), p. 46; Chron. of London
(Nicolas), p. 106.</p></note>
Lollardry continued to exist, especially in London and
the towns, for some years, but it ceased to have any
historical or political significance.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., iii., 363, 364.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Preparations for the invasion of France, 1414-1415.</note>

<p>Henry V was resolved to maintain not only the
old religion of the days of Edward III, but also the
old foreign policy, and in 1414 he commenced making
preparations for renewing the claim of his great-grandfather
to the crown of France. In 1415 this claim
was formally made, and Henry gathered his forces
together at Southampton. On the 10th March he
informed the civic authorities of his intention of crossing
over to France to enforce his claim and of his
need of money. On the 14th a brilliant assembly,
comprising the king's two brothers, John, Duke of
Bedford, and Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, Edward,
Duke of York, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishop of Winchester, and others, met at the Guildhall
to consider the matter.</p>

<note place="margin">A question of precedence in the city.</note>

<p>A question arose as to order of precedence, and it
was arranged that the mayor, as the king's representative
in the City, should occupy the centre seat, having
the Primate and the Bishop of Winchester on his<pb n="258" /><anchor id="Pg258" />
right, and the Duke of York and the king's brothers
on his left.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 150. This "very antient memorandum" of
the Lord Mayor's precedence in the City was submitted to Charles II
in 1670, when that monarch insisted upon Sir Richard Ford, the Lord
Mayor of the day, giving "the hand and the place" to the Prince of
Orange (afterwards William III of England), on the occasion of the
prince being entertained by the City.&mdash;Repertory, 76, fos. 28b, 29.</p></note> This question having been settled, the
meeting, we presume, got to business; but what took
place is not recorded in the City's archives. We
know, however, that in June the king pledged his
jewels to the City for a loan of 10,000 marks,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 158b. (Memorials, p. 613).</p></note> and
that on the 1st August&mdash;just as he was preparing to
set sail&mdash;he raised a further loan of 10,000 marks on
the security of the customs.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 157.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king takes leave of the citizens on Blackheath, June, 1415.</note>

<p>On the 15th June the king, who was then on his
way to the coast, took solemn leave of the civic
authorities, who had accompanied him to Blackheath.
He bade them go home and keep well his "chamber"
during his absence abroad, giving them his blessing
and saying "Cryste save London."<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron. (Camd. Soc, N.S., No. 17), pp. 108-109.
Gregory was an alderman of the City, and an eye-witness of much that
he relates.</p></note> Arriving at
Southampton, he there discovered a conspiracy to
place the young Earl of March, the legitimate heir of
Edward III, on the throne, as soon as he himself
should have set sail. The traitors were seized and
executed, and the City lost no time in sending the king
a letter congratulating him upon his discovery of
the plot.<note place="foot"><p>Letter dated 2nd August&mdash;the day on which Sir Thomas Grey,
one of the chief conspiritors was executed.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 180.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The capture of Harfleur, 18 Sept., 1415.</note>

<p>A few days later (12th August) he sailed for
France and landed near Harfleur, to which town he<pb n="259" /><anchor id="Pg259" /><index index="toc" level1="BATTLE OF AGINCOURT." />
laid siege. It offered, however, a stubborn defence,
and it was not until the 18th September that the
town surrendered. On the 22nd Henry sent a long
account of the siege and capture to the mayor and
citizens of London, bidding them render humble
thanks to Almighty God for this mercy, and expressing
a hope of further success in the near future.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 143. (Memorials, p. 619).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Volunteers for service in France required, Oct., 1415.</note>

<note place="margin">Citizens invited to reside in Harfleur.</note>

<p>Early in October the king caused proclamation
to be made in the City, that all and singular knights,
esquires and valets who were willing to go with him
to Normandy, should present themselves to his uncle
Henry, Bishop of Winchester and Treasurer of
England, who would pay them their wages. By the
same proclamation merchants, victuallers and handicraft-men
were invited to take up their residence in
the recently captured town of Harfleur, where houses
would be assigned to them, and where they should
enjoy the same privileges and franchises to which they
had always been accustomed.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 177.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Joy in the city at the news of the battle of Agincourt, Oct., 1415.</note>

<note place="margin">The citizens welcome the king on his return from France.</note>

<p>The battle of Agincourt was fought on the 25th
October, and news of the joyous victory arrived in
England on or before the 28th, on which day&mdash;the
Feast of St. Simon and St. Jude&mdash;Nicholas Wotton,
the recently elected mayor, was sworn into office at
the Guildhall according to custom. On the following
day, therefore, the mayor, aldermen and a large
number of the commonalty made a solemn pilgrimage
on foot to Westminster, where they first made devout
thanksgiving for the victory that had been won, and
then proceeded to present the new mayor before the
Barons of the Exchequer. Care is taken in the City<pb n="260" /><anchor id="Pg260" />
records to explain that the procession went on this
occasion on foot, simply and solely for the purpose of
marking their humble thanks to the Almighty and his
Saints, and more especially to Edward the Confessor,
who lay interred at Westminster, for the joyful news
which so unexpectedly had arrived. The journey on
foot was not to be drawn into precedent when others
succeeded to the mayoralty, nor supplant the riding
in state which had been customary on such occasions.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 159. (Memorials, pp. 620, 622).</p></note>
The reception given to the king by the Londoners on
his return from France, was of so brilliant and varied
a character, that one chronicler declares that a description
of it would require a special treatise.<note place="foot"><p>"Quali gaudio, quali tripudio, quali denique triumpho, sit acceptus
a Londoniensibus, dicere prætermitto. Quia revera curiositas apparatumn,
nimietas expensarum, varietates spectaculorum, tractatus exigerent
merito speciales."&mdash;Walsingham, ii, 314.</p></note> On the
16th November he landed at Dover and proceeded
towards London. On Saturday, the 23rd, the mayor
and aldermen and all the companies rode forth in
their liveries to meet the king and conduct him and
his train of French prisoners through the City to
Westminster. On Sunday morning a deputation from
the City waited upon Henry and presented him with
the sum of £1,000 and two basons of gold worth half
that sum.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of London (Nicolas), p. 103.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Preparations for another expedition, 1416-1417.</note>

<p>During the next eighteen months succeeding the
battle of Agincourt, Henry devoted himself to
making preparations at home for renewing active
military operations. He had intended at midsummer,
1416, to lead an expedition in person to the relief
of Harfleur, but the command was subsequently<pb n="261" /><anchor id="Pg261" /><index index="toc" level1="MORE CITY LOANS." />
delegated to his brother, the Duke of Bedford. Proclamation
was publicly made in the city by order of the
king, dated the 28th May, that all and singular
knights, esquires and valets holding any fief or
annuity from the king should proceed to Southampton
by the 20th June, armed each according to his estate,
for the purpose of joining the expedition.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 178b. Other proclamations on the same subject
are recorded in the same place, most of which will be found in
"Memorials" (pp. 627-629).</p></note> In 1417
France was rendered weak by factions, and Henry
seized the opportunity for another attack. On the 1st
February he issued his writ to the sheriffs of London
for a return to be made of the number of men-at-arms
and archers the City knights could furnish.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 190b.</p></note> In
March the mayor, Henry Barton, was made a commissioner
for victualling the navy which was to
rendezvous at Southampton.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 188, 188b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">City loans, 1417.</note>

<p>In the same month the City advanced the king
the sum of 5,000 marks,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 191b.</p></note> and in the following June a
further sum was advanced by private subscription
among the wealthier citizens on the security of a
Spanish sword, set in gold and precious stones, of the
estimated value of £2,000. The sword was pledged
with the subscribers on the understanding that they
would not dispose of it before Michaelmas twelve-month.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 218b. In May, 1419, the sword was surrendered,
and the security changed to one on wool, woolfells, &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>,
fo. 227b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Letter from the king to the City announcing his success, 9 Aug., 1417.</note>

<note place="margin">Another letter informing them of the capture of Caen, 5 Sept.</note>

<p>On the 9th August the king addressed a letter to
the mayor, sheriffs, aldermen and good folk of the
City of London, informing them of his safe arrival in<pb n="262" /><anchor id="Pg262" />
Normandy and of his success in making himself
master of the castle of "Touque" without bloodshed.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 229. (Memorials, p. 654.)</p></note>
To this the citizens sent a dutiful reply on the
28th day of the same month, assuring the king of the
peaceful condition of the city. On the 2nd September
an order went forth from the Common Council of
the City that each alderman should immediately
instruct the constables of his ward to go their rounds
and warn all soldiers they might come across, to
vacate the City and set out on the king's service
before the end of the week on pain of imprisonment.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 1, fo. 30b.</p></note>
Success continued to attend Henry's arms. On the
5th September he was able to inform the citizens, by
letter,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 200b. (Memorials, p. 657.)</p></note> of the capture of Caen, excepting only the
citadel, and this was to be rendered to him by
the 19th day of the same month at the latest, unless
relief should have previously arrived for the besieged
from the King of France, his son the Dauphin, or the
Count of Armagnac, Constable of France. The Duke
of Clarence wrote a few days later to the citizens,
notifying the extraordinary success which had followed
the king. So many towns and fortresses had been
taken that the only fear was that there were not
sufficient men to keep guard over them.<note place="foot"><p>Letter, dated Caen, 11 September.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 200b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proclamation by the Duke of Bedford, 18 Oct.</note>

<note place="margin">Supplies granted by parliament, Dec, 1417.</note>

<p>In order to keep the English force in Normandy
better provided with victuals, the Duke of Bedford,
who had been left behind as the king's lieutenant,
caused the Sheriffs of London to proclaim that all
persons willing and able to ship victuals to France for<pb n="263" /><anchor id="Pg263" /><index index="toc" level1="HENRY'S CONQUEST OF NORMANDY." />
Henry's use, might do so without paying custom dues
on their giving security that the victuals should be
sent to Caen and not elsewhere.<note place="foot"><p>Writ, dated 18th Oct.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 203.</p></note> Bedford, who was
learning how to rule a free people&mdash;a lesson which,
had he been allowed to practice in after years, might
have saved the house of Lancaster from utter destruction<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., iii, 89.</p></note>&mdash;presided
in the parliament, which met in
November, 1417. On the 17th December this parliament
granted the king two fifteenths and two tenths.
No time was lost in taking measures for collecting
these supplies, the king's writ appointing commissioners
for the City of London being issued the day
following.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 222.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's conquest of Normandy, 1417-1419.</note>

<p>In Paris matters were going on from bad to
worse. Whilst the capital of France was at the
mercy of a mob, Henry proceeded to lay close siege
to Rouen. Frequent proclamation was made in
London for reinforcements to join the king, either at
Rouen or elsewhere in Normandy.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fos. 211b, 212b, 217. Proclamations made by the
civic authorities at this time were subscribed "Carpenter"&mdash;the name
of the Common Clerk or Town Clerk of the City. The custom of the
Town Clerk of London for the time being, signing official documents
of this kind with his surname alone, continues at the present day.</p></note> This was in
April, 1418, or thereabouts. On the 5th July, the
Duke of Clarence informed Richard Merlawe, the
mayor, by letter, of the fall of Louviers, and of the
expected surrender of Pont de l'Arche,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 215b.</p></note> from which
latter place the duke wrote. On the 10th August
Henry himself wrote to the citizens informing them
of his having sat down before Rouen and of the<pb n="264" /><anchor id="Pg264" />
straits his forces were in for lack of victuals and
more especially of "drink." He begged them to
send as many small vessels as they could, laden
with provisions, to Harfleur, whence they could
make their way up the Seine to Rouen.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 216. (Memorials, p. 664).</p></note> In less
than a month a reply was sent (8 Sept.) from
Gravesend under the seal of the mayoralty, informing
Henry that the citizens had been busy brewing ale
and beer and purveying wine and other "vitaille," and
that they had despatched thirty butts of sweet wine&mdash;comprising
ten of "Tyre," ten of "Romesey," and ten
of "Malvesy"&mdash;and 1,000 pipes of ale and beer.
With these they had also sent 25,000 cups for the
king's "host" to drink out of.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 216. On the 15th September the question of
payment to the brewers, wine drawers and turners of the cups was
considered.&mdash;Journal I, fo. 48. (Memorials, pp. 665, 666).</p></note> In the meantime, the
besieged received no such relief from the pains of
hunger and thirst, and on the 19th January, 1419,
they were compelled to surrender their ancient town.<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron. (Camd. Soc, N.S., No. 17), 1222.</p></note>
The war continued throughout the year (1419),
all attempts at a reconciliation proving abortive.
Pointoise fell into Henry's hands; and both Henry
and the Duke of Clarence sent word of its capture to
London. The duke took the opportunity of asking
that the freedom of the City might be conferred on
his servant, Roger Tillyngton, a skinner; but the
citizens in acknowledging the duke's letter make no
reference to his request.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fos. 236, 236b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's letter to the City, 17 Aug., 1419.</note>

<p>On the 17th August the king wrote again to the
mayor, aldermen and commons of the City, thanking<pb n="265" /><anchor id="Pg265" /><index index="toc" level1="THE TREATY OF TROVES." />
them for their "kynde and notable prone of an ayde,"
which they had granted of their own free will, therein
setting a good example to others, and prayed them to
follow such directions as the Duke of Bedford should
give them respecting their proffered assistance. The
bearer of this letter having been taken prisoner at
Crotoye, a duplicate copy of it was afterwards forwarded
from Trie le Chastel on the 12th September.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 237. (Memorials, p. 674).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The treaty of Troyes, 20 May. 1420.</note>

<p>The murder of John, Duke of Burgundy, by a
partisan of the Dauphin, which took place about this
time, induced Duke Philip to come to terms with
England in the hope of avenging his father's death;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 241b.</p></note>
and the French king, finding further resistance hopeless,
was content to make peace. By the treaty of
Troyes (20 May, 1420), the Dauphin was disinherited
in favour of Henry, who was formally recognised
as the heir to the French crown, and who agreed
to marry Catherine, daughter of Charles VI.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 252.</p></note> The
marriage took place on the 3rd June, and on the
14th a solemn procession was made in London and
a sermon preached at Paul's Cross in honour of the
event.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 335.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's letter to the City, 12 July, 1420.</note>

<note place="margin">The mayor's reply, 2 Aug.</note>

<p>On the 12th July Henry addressed a letter from
Mant to the corporation of London informing them
of his welfare. He had left Paris for Mant in order
to relieve the town of Chartres, which was being
threatened by the Dauphin. The Duke of Burgundy
had joined him and had proved himself "a trusty,
lovvng and faithful brother." The king's expedition
proved unnecessary, for the Dauphin had raised the
siege before his arrival and had gone into Touraine.<pb n="266" /><anchor id="Pg266" />
To this letter a reply was sent under the mayoralty
seal on the 2nd August, congratulating Henry upon
his success, and assuring him that there was no city
on earth more peaceful or better governed than his
City of London.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 263.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The queen's coronation.</note>

<p>On the 26th January, 1421, the Duke of Gloucester,
the Guardian of England in the king's absence,
ordered the Sheriffs of London to announce that the
queen's coronation would take place at Westminster
on the third Sunday in Lent.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 259.  According to Walsingham (ii, 336), the
ceremony took place on the <hi rend="font-style: italic">first</hi> Sunday in Lent.</p></note> The king and queen
landed at Dover with a small retinue on the 1st February,
and after a few days' rest at Canterbury,
entered the city of London amid tokens of welcome
and respect from the laity and clergy. They took up
their abode at the Tower, whence they were conducted
on the day appointed for the coronation to
Westminster by the citizens on foot and on horseback.<note place="foot"><p>Walsingham, ii, 336, 337.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's last expedition, and death, Aug., 1422.</note>

<p>Henry had not been at home six months before
he again left England, never to return.<note place="foot"><p>Parliament voted a fifteenth and a tenth to assist the king in
his necessities; John Gedney, alderman, John Perneys, John Bacon,
grocer, and John Patesley, goldsmith, being appointed commissioners to
levy the same within the City.&mdash;Letter Book I, fo. 277b.</p></note> The hopes
that he entertained of reforming and governing his
possessions in France, and his ambition to have
headed, sooner or later, a crusade which should have
stayed the progress of the Ottoman and have recovered
the sepulchre of Christ, were not destined to
be realised. He died at the Bois de Vincennes, near
Paris, on the last day of August, 1422, leaving a child<pb n="267" /><anchor id="Pg267" /><index index="toc" level1="DEATH OF KING HENRY V." />
nine months old&mdash;the unhappy Henry of Windsor
who succeeded to the throne as Henry VI. When
the body of the late king was brought over from
France to be buried at Westminster, the citizens
showed it every token of respect in its passage through
London. The streets of the city, as well as of the
borough of Southwark, were cleaned for the occasion.
The mayor, sheriffs, recorder and aldermen, accompanied
by the chief burgesses, and clad in white gowns
and hoods, went forth to meet the remains of the
king they loved so well, as far as St. George's bar
in Southwark, and reverently conducted them to St.
Paul's Church, where the funeral obsequies were performed.
The next day they accompanied the corpse
to Westminster, where further ceremonies took place.
Representatives of the various wards were told off to
line the streets, the solemnity of the occasion being
marked by the burning of torches, whilst chaplains
stood in the porches of the various churches, clad in
their richest copes, with thuribles in their hands, and
chanted the <hi rend="font-style: italic">venite</hi> and incensed the royal remains as
they passed. The livery companies provided amongst
them 211 torches, and to each torch-bearer the city
chamberlain gave a gown and hood of white material
or "blanket" (<hi rend="font-style: italic">de blanqueto</hi>), at the "cost of the
commonalty." <note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 1b.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="268" /><anchor id="Pg268" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XI.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">Rivalry between Bedford and Gloucester, 1422.</note>

<p>At the death of Henry V the administration of
affairs fell into the hands of his two brothers, John,
Duke of Bedford, and Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester.
On the 29th September a writ was issued from
Windsor, in the name of the infant on whom the
crown of England had devolved, summoning four
citizens of London to attend a parliament to be held
at Westminster at Martinmas,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 282b.</p></note> and two days afterwards
another was addressed to the sheriffs of London,
enjoining them to make proclamation for the keeping
the king's peace, and authorising them to arrest and
imprison rioters until the king and his council should
determine upon their punishment.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book I, fo. 282b; Letter Book K, fo. 12.</p></note> The precise wishes
of the late king as to the respective parts which Bedford
and Gloucester were to undertake in the government
of the realm are not clearly known, but it is
generally thought that he intended the former to
govern France, whilst the latter was to act as his
vicegerent in England. An attempt to carry out the
arrangement was doomed to failure.</p>

<p>As soon as parliament met (9 Nov.) it took
into consideration the respective claims of the two
dukes. Bedford had already (26 Oct.) despatched
a letter from Rouen, addressed to the civic authorities,<pb n="269" /><anchor id="Pg269" /><index index="toc" level1="RIVAL CLAIMS OF BEDFORD AND GLOUCESTER." />
setting forth his right to the government of the
realm, as elder brother of the deceased sovereign
and as the party most interested in the succession
to the crown. Without mentioning Gloucester by
name, he warned the citizens against executing orders
derogatory to himself. He professed to do this, not
from any ambitious designs of his own, but from a
wish to preserve intact the laws, usage and customs
of the realm.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 2.</p></note> After some hesitation, parliament
resolved to appoint Bedford protector as soon as he
should return from France, but that during his absence
Gloucester should act for him.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., iii, 97.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">An expedition to start for France, 1 March, 1423.</note>

<p>On the 8th February of the new year (1423),
the sheriffs of London received orders to make proclamation
for all soldiers who were in the king's pay
to assemble at Winchelsea by the 1st day of March,
as an expedition was to set sail from that port for
the purpose of defending the town and castle of
Crotoye. The business was pressing and necessitated a
repetition of the order to the sheriffs a fortnight later
(22 Feb.).<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fos. 10, 10b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Sir John Mortimer.</note>

<p>On the 23rd February William Crowmere, the
mayor, William Sevenoke, William Waldene, and
John Fray were appointed commissioners to enquire
into cases of treason and felony within the city; and
two days later they found Sir John Mortimer, who
was charged with a treasonable design in favour of
the Earl of March, guilty of having broken prison.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 15b.</p></note>
He was subsequently convicted of treason both by
lords and commons, and sentenced to death.</p>

<pb n="270" /><anchor id="Pg270" />

<note place="margin">The debts of Henry IV.</note>

<p>On the 5th June (1423) the hearts of the citizens
were gladdened with the news that they were likely
to be repaid some of the money they had advanced
to the king's grandfather. Orders were given for all
persons to whom Henry IV was indebted at the time
of his decease, and who had not yet received from
his executors a moiety of the sums due, to send in
their bills and tallies to Sir John Pelham and John
Leventhorp, two of the king's executors, sitting at
the Priory of Saint Mary, Southwark, by the Monday
next after Midsummer-day.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fos. 10-18.</p></note> We can believe that
few orders ever met with readier response from the
inhabitants of the city.</p>

<note place="margin">Gloucester and Beaufort, 1425-1428.</note>

<p>At home as well as abroad Gloucester soon made
enemies; among them was his own uncle, the Chancellor,
Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, a
wealthy and ambitious prelate. During Gloucester's
absence on the continent, whither he had gone to
recover the estates of his newly-married wife, the
ill-fated Jacqueline of Hainault, Beaufort garrisoned
the Tower with creatures of his own. When Gloucester
returned mutual recriminations took place, and
the mayor was ordered (29 Oct., 1425) to prevent
Beaufort entering the city. A riot ensued in which
the citizens took the part of the duke, and the bishop
had to take refuge in Southwark. The quarrel was
patched up for awhile until Bedford, who was sent
for, should arrive to act as arbitrator.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. London (Nicolas), p. 114; Gregory's Chron. (Camd. Soc.,
N.S., No. 17), p. 159; Engl. Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 64), pp. 53, 54.</p></note> He arrived in
London on the 10th January, 1426. The citizens,
who had more than once been in communication with<pb n="271" /><anchor id="Pg271" />
the duke<note place="foot"><p>See two letters from the mayor.&mdash;Letter Book K, fos. 18b, 21.</p></note> during his absence abroad, presented him
with a pair of basins, silver-gilt, containing 1,000
marks. The gift, however, does not appear to have
been so graciously received as it might have been,
for a London alderman records that the donors, for
all their liberality, "hadde but lytylle thanke."<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., p. 160.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">End of the quarrel between Gloucester and Beaufort.</note>

<p>The two brothers had not met since the death of
Henry V. After prolonged negotiations, a <hi rend="font-style: italic">modus
vivendi</hi> between the parties was arrived at, and
Gloucester and the bishop were induced to shake
hands. Beaufort left England soon afterwards with
the Duke of Bedford, on the plea of making a pilgrimage,
and did not return until September, 1428,
by which time he had been made a cardinal and
appointed papal legate in England. Notwithstanding
his legatine authority being unacknowledged by
Gloucester and others, the citizens received him on
his return "worthily and loyally," riding out to
meet him and escorting him into London.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 162.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Gloucester loses the favour of the citizens.</note>

<p>Gloucester had always been a favourite with the
Londoners, until his conduct to his Flemish wife,
whom he left behind on the continent to fight her
own battles as best as she could, and the undisguised
attention he paid to Eleanor Cobham, a lady in his
wife's suite, whom he eventually married, estranged
their favour. In August, 1424, the Common Council
had voted the duke a gift of 500 marks; and two
years later&mdash;viz., in April, 1426&mdash;the citizens raised a
sum, variously stated to have been £1,000 and 1,000
marks, for the benefit of his duchess.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 2, fos. 22b, 64b (new pagination).</p></note> The female<pb n="272" /><anchor id="Pg272" />
portion of the community were specially incensed
against the duke, and a number of women went the
length of presenting themselves before parliament in
1427, with a letter complaining of his behaviour towards
his wife. In March of the next year (1428)
the citizens themselves followed suit, and drew the
attention of parliament, through the mouth of John
Symond, their Recorder, to the wretched straits to
which the duchess had been reduced, as witnessed her
own letters. They begged parliament to consider the
best means for recovering for her the lands of Hainault,
Holland and Zeeland, which had always been
places of sure refuge for the English merchant, and
the rulers of which had ever been friendly to the king
of England. The citizens finally avowed themselves
ready to take upon themselves their share in any
undertaking the lords and commons of the realm might
decide upon.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 50b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The siege of Orleans, 1428-1429.</note>

<p>In the meantime matters had not gone well with
the English in France. In July, 1427, the Earl of
Salisbury came over to London for reinforcements.<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., p. 161.</p></note>
In September of the following year he was able to
inform the City of the success that had attended his
recruited army.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 55b.</p></note> He was then within a short distance
of Orleans, before which town he shortly afterwards
met his death. Bedford continued the siege, but the
town held out until May, 1429, when it was relieved
by the Maid from the little village of Domremi, and
the English army was compelled to retreat.</p>

<note place="margin">Famine in London, 1429.</note>

<p>Whilst Bedford was conducting the siege of
Orleans, and Jeanne Darc was meditating how best to<pb n="273" /><anchor id="Pg273" /><index index="toc" level1="RELIEF OF ORLEANS." />
relieve the town, the citizens of London were suffering
from a severe dearth. At length the Common
Council resolved (22 July, 1429) to send agents
abroad for the purpose of transmitting all the corn
they could lay their hands on to England. The
assistance of Bedford, who had by this time been
compelled to raise the siege of Orleans, was invoked.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fos. 62, 63b; Gregory's Chron., p. 164.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Beaufort joins Bedford in France.</note>

<p>Bedford had recently been joined by Beaufort,
who had become more than ever an object of hatred
to Gloucester, and had lost to a certain extent the
goodwill of the nation by the acceptance of a
cardinal's hat. He had set out on the 22nd June
(1429), carrying with him a small force which he was
allowed to raise for the avowed object of prosecuting
a Hussite crusade in Bohemia, but which was
eventually sent to France.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 66b; Gregory's Chron., p. 164.</p></note> The question of his
position in parliament and the council, now that he
was a cardinal, was decided by the parliament which
met on the 22nd September.</p>

<note place="margin">Allowances made to those representing the City in parliament, 1429.</note>

<p>Members of parliament representing the City of
London had hitherto been allowed a certain amount
of cloth and fur trimming at the City's expense,
wherewith to dress themselves and their personal
attendants in a manner suitable to the position they
held. Those who had from time to time been elected
members appear to have abused this privilege&mdash;where
a yard had been given, they had literally taken
an ell&mdash;and it was now thought to be high time to
take steps to check the abuse in future. Accordingly
it was ordained by the mayor and aldermen, on the
12th August of this year (and the ordinance met with<pb n="274" /><anchor id="Pg274" />
the approval of the commoners on the 29th day of
the same month), that for the future no alderman
elected to attend parliament should take out of the
chamber or of the commonalty more than ten yards
for gown and cloak, at 15<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> the yard, and 100<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi>
for fur if the alderman had already served as
mayor, otherwise he was to have no more than five
marks. Commoners were to be content with five
yards of cloth and 33<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> for fur. Each alderman,
moreover, was to be allowed eight yards of cloth
at 28 pence a yard for two personal attendants,
and each commoner four yards of the same for one
attendant, if the parliament was sitting in London or
the neighbourhood, and eight yards for two attendants
if parliament was sitting in some more remote place,
"as was formerly ordained during the mayoralty of
John Michell" (1424-5).<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 68b. In 1443 the Common Council agreed
to allow the City members their reasonable expenses out of the
chamber (Journal 5, fo. 129b), but when parliament met at Coventry
in 1459, the City members were allowed 40<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> a day, besides any disbursements
they might make in the City's honour (Journal 6, fo. 166b),
and the same allowance was made in 1464, when parliament sat at
York (Journal 7, fos. 52, 54).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The coronation of Henry VI, 6 Nov., 1429.</note>

<p>The condition of France necessitated the early
coronation of the young king, whose right to the
French crown had been established by the Treaty of
Troyes. At his accession to the throne of England
Henry VI was but a child of nine months. He was
now eight years old. Before he could be crowned
King of France, it was necessary that he should first
be crowned King of England. Proclamation was
accordingly made that he would be crowned on the
6th November following, and that all claims to services
should be forthwith laid before the lord steward.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 69b.</p></note><pb n="275" /><anchor id="Pg275" /><index index="toc" level1="CORONATION OF HENRY VI." />
Gregory, to whose chronicle we have had frequent
occasion to refer, writing as an eye-witness, gives
a full account<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., pp. 164-168.</p></note> of what took place at the ceremony
of coronation in Westminster Abbey, and of
the banquet that followed; but omits to mention
that the citizens put in their usual claim, in accordance
with the above proclamation, to serve the king
at the banquet as butler. That the claim was actually
made we learn from other sources.<note place="foot"><p>City Records, Liber Dunthorn, fo. 61b; Letter Book K, fo. 70.</p></note> We also know
that William Estfeld, the recently-elected mayor,
received the customary gold cup and ewer used on
the occasion, which he afterwards bequeathed to his
grandson.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. of Wills, Court of Husting, London, ii, 509.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Sets out for France, April, 1430.</note>

<note place="margin">And is crowned in Paris, Dec., 1431.</note>

<p>In April, 1430, the young king left England for
France, and remained abroad for nearly two years.
On the 10th November he wrote to the mayor and
citizens, urging them to advance him the sum of
10,000 marks, as that sum might do him more ease
and service at that particular time than double the
amount at another. The letter was dated from
Rouen, where the court afterwards established itself
for a considerable time.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 84.</p></note> On Sunday, the 12th December,
1431, he made his entry into Paris with great
ceremony, and was duly crowned.<note place="foot"><p>A long account of his entry into the French capital, and of the
pageantry in honour of the occasion, is set out in full in the City's
Records.&mdash;Letter Book K, fos. 101b-103.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The citizens welcome him on his return, 1432.</note>

<p>On his return to England early in the following
year, he was met by John Welles, the mayor, the
aldermen, the sheriffs, and more than 12,000 citizens<pb n="276" /><anchor id="Pg276" />
of London, who rode out on Thursday, the 20th
February, as far as Blackheath, and was there presented
with the following address:&mdash;</p>

<p rend="display"><hi rend="font-style: italic">"Sovereign lord as welcome be ye to your noble
Roialme of Englond, and in especial to your notable
Cite London oþerwise called your Chambre, as ever
was cristen prince to place or people, and of the good
and gracioux achevyng of your Coronne of Fraunce,
we thank hertlich our lord almyghty which of his
endles mercy sende you grace in yoye and prosperite
on us and all your other people long for to regne."</hi></p>

<note place="margin">The mayor and aldermen present him with a gift of £1,000.</note>

<p>After hearing the address the king rode to
Deptford, where he was met by a procession of 120
rectors and curates of the city, in the richest copes,
and 500 secular chaplains in the whitest of surplices,
with whom were a like number of monks bearing
crosses, tapers and incense, and chanting psalms
and antiphons in grateful thanks for his safe return.
Thence the royal cavalcade passed through Southwark
to the city, where pageants appeared at every
turn. The fulsome adulation bestowed upon a lad
scarcely ten years of age was enough to turn his
young brain. Passing through Cornhill and Chepe, the
procession eventually reached St. Paul's. There the
king dismounted, and being met by the Archbishop
of Canterbury and ten other bishops in their pontifical
robes, was led by them to the high altar. Prayers
were said and the sacred relics kissed. The king
then remounted his horse and made his way to his
palace of Westminster, the streets being hung with
tapestry and the houses thronged to their roofs with
crowds of onlookers, and was there allowed a brief
day's rest. On the following Saturday a deputation<pb n="277" /><anchor id="Pg277" /><index index="toc" level1="THE KING'S RETURN FROM FRANCE." />
from the city, headed by the mayor and aldermen,
went to the palace and presented Henry with £1,000
of the purest gold, in a gold casket, with these
words:&mdash;</p>

<p>"<hi rend="font-style: italic">Most cristen prince the good folk of youre notable
Cite of London, otherwise cleped your Chambre, besechen
in her most lowely wise that they mowe be recomanded
un to yo<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> hynesse, ant þ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi> can like youre noble grace to
resceyve this litell yefte yoven with as good will and
lovyng hertes as any yefte was yoven to eny erthly
prince.</hi>"</p>

<p>The king having graciously acknowledged the
gift, the deputation returned to the city.<note place="foot"><p>A full descriptive account of Henry's reception on his return from
France is set out in the City Records (Letter Book K, fos. 103b-104b).
It purports to be an account sent by John Carpenter, the Town Clerk,
to a friend, and has been printed at the end of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber Albus</hi> (Rolls
Series); <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Gregory's Chron., pp. 173-175.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Gloucester's attacks on Beaufort and Bedford, 1432-1433.</note>

<p>Beaufort, who had returned home in time for
the coronation, had again set out for France with
the king, and Gloucester took advantage of their
absence to renew his attack on his rival. Letters of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">prœmunire</hi> were drawn up in anticipation of the cardinal's
return, and additional offence was given by the
seizure of the cardinal's plate and jewels at Dover.
On learning of Gloucester's schemes, Beaufort determined
to give up a projected visit to Rome, and to
return home in time for the opening of parliament
(12th May, 1432).<note place="foot"><p>He informed the City of his intention by letter, dated from Ghent
the 13th April.&mdash;Letter Book K, fo. 105.</p></note> He desired to learn why he had
been thus "strangely demeened" contrary to his
deserts. When parliament met and the cardinal
asked who were his accusers, Gloucester held his<pb n="278" /><anchor id="Pg278" />
tongue, and the king expressed his confidence in the
cardinal's loyalty. In the following year (1433)
Bedford appeared before parliament and announced
that he had come home to defend himself against
false accusations. He understood that the recent
losses that had occurred in France were attributed to
his neglect. He desired his accusers, of whom he
shrewdly suspected Gloucester to be one, to stand
forth and prove their charges. Again there was
silence, and the duke, like the cardinal, had to rest
satisfied with the king's assurance of loyalty.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., iii, 114-117.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Financial reform, 1433.</note>

<p>The finances of the country were at this time
(1433) in the most deplorable condition. It was
necessary to exercise the strictest economy. Bedford
was the first to set an example of self-denial
by offering to discharge the duties of counsellor at a
reduced salary. Gloucester followed his brother's
example. The archbishops, the cardinal, and the
bishops of Lincoln and Ely agreed to render their
services without payment. Parliament showed its
good will by voting a fifteenth and tenth, but out of
the sum thus realised £4,000 was to be applied to
the relief of poor towns. The amount of relief
which fell to the share of the poorer wards of the
City of London was £76 15<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 6-1/4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, which was
apportioned among eighteen wards. The largest sum
allotted was £20, which went to Cordwainer Street
Ward, whilst Lime Street Ward received the magnificent
relief afforded by the odd farthing.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 137b.</p></note> The
mayor, sheriffs and aldermen were called upon to
attend in person before the chancellor, in April, 1434,
to make oath that they would duly observe a certain<pb n="279" /><anchor id="Pg279" /><index index="toc" level1="CALAIS APPEALS TO LONDON." />
article (<hi rend="font-style: italic">quendam articulum</hi>) which the late parliament
had agreed to, but what this article was does not
appear in the City's archives.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 138.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The death of Bedford, 14 Sept., 1435.</note>

<p>Bedford was prevailed upon to remain in England
and undertake the office of chief counsellor, but
differences again arising between him and Gloucester,
which the personal interference of the young king
could with difficulty calm, he again set sail for France
(June, 1434). His career was fast drawing to an end.
Burgundy was intending to desert him as he knew
full well, and the knowledge accelerated his end.
His death took place at Rouen on the 14th September
of the following year (1435).<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., p. 177.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Calais appeals to London for assistance, 27 June, 1436.</note>

<p>With his death England's supremacy in France
began to decline, and Henry VI was to lose in that
country all or nearly all that had been gained by his
doughty predecessor. The defection of Burgundy
was followed by the loss of Paris. The chief event
of 1436 was the raising of the siege of Calais, which
had been invested by the Duke of Burgundy. On
the 27th June the mayor and aldermen of Calais,
being anxious to get help from the government at
home, and finding that according to precedent they
could only do so through the mediation of the City of
London, addressed a letter to the mayor and aldermen
of London imploring them, as the head of "the
principal of all the cities of the realm of England," to
move the king to send the requisite aid.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 148.</p></note></p>

<p>In answer to this appeal Henry Frowyk, the
mayor, consulted the livery companies, and by their<pb n="280" /><anchor id="Pg280" />
advice sent a contingent to the relief of the town.<note place="foot"><p>"And that same yere (1437), the Mayre of London sende, by the
good a-vyse and consent of craftys, sent sowdyers to Calys, for hyt was
sayde that the Duke of Burgone lay sege unto Calis."&mdash;Gregory's
Chron. p. 178.</p></note>
The king, too, had been very urgent that the City
should raise a force to oppose "the man who stiled
himself Duke of Burgundy and Count of Flanders,"
whilst he took pains to conciliate such Flemings as
were living in the city and were ready to take an oath
of allegiance.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fos. 160-162.</p></note> Gloucester had been appointed captain
of Calais for a term of nine years, but before he
set sail for its relief the siege had been raised by
Edmund Beaufort, Count of Mortain.<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron. p. 179.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A tax imposed on aliens, 1439.</note>

<p>An attempt was made in 1439 to bring about a
peace, but it failed, and a new tax&mdash;a tax upon aliens&mdash;had
to be imposed for the purpose of raising money
in addition to the usual supplies. Every alien householder
was called upon to pay sixteen pence, and
every alien who was not a householder sixpence, towards
the expenses of the country.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K. fo. 183b. The tax was found to be so successful
that it was subsequently renewed. In 1453 it was renewed for the
king's life.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 280b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The penance of Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's wife, 1441.</note>

<p>The streets of the city have witnessed few sadder
sights than the penance inflicted on Eleanor
Cobham, at one time the mistress, and afterwards&mdash;on
the dissolution of his marriage with Jacqueline&mdash;the
wife of Gloucester. The new duchess was aware
that in the event of the king's death her husband was
next in succession to the throne, and was inclined to
anticipate matters. It was a superstitious age, and
the duchess invoked the aid of witchcraft to accomplish
her wishes. In 1441 her operations, innocent as<pb n="281" /><anchor id="Pg281" /><index index="toc" level1="THE PENANCE OF ELEANOR COBHAM." />
they were in themselves, however bad their intent,
were discovered, and she was condemned to do public
penance followed by imprisonment for life. For three
days the wretched lady was made to walk the streets,
taper in hand and bare-foot (it was November), in the
sight of all the citizens, who were forbidden to show
her any respect, but, at the same time, were ordered
not to molest her.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 3, fo. 103b.</p></note> The latter they were little likely
to do. Nay! on each day as she landed at the
Temple, at the Swan or at Oueenhithe, the mayor
and sheriffs went forth to attend her, accompanied by
members of the livery companies.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of London (Nicolas), p. 129.</p></note> Yet, not a finger
did her husband raise in her defence! He either
could not or would not save her.</p>

<note place="margin">The king's charter to the City, 26 Oct., 1444.</note>

<p>By charter, dated the 26th day of October, 1444,
the king confirmed the mayor, recorder and certain
aldermen as justices of the peace, and, among other
things, granted to the corporation the soil of the
Thames within the City's liberties.<note place="foot"><p>The validity as well as the effect of this charter (which is preserved
in the Town Clerk's office) has been made the subject of much controversy,
some contending that it is in effect a grant of the soil of the river
from Staines to Yantlet, that being the extent of the City's liberties on
the Thames, whilst others restrict the grant to the City's territorial
limits, <hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, from Temple Bar to the Tower.</p></note> This grant was
not made without some little opposition from the
inhabitants of the neighbouring county of Surrey.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 220b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's marriage with Margaret of Anjou, 22 April, 1445.</note>

<p>The king was now under the influence of William
de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, by whose intervention a
truce with France had been concluded on the 28th
May of this year (1444), to last until the 1st April,
1446. In order to strengthen the truce, a marriage<pb n="282" /><anchor id="Pg282" />
was arranged between Henry and Margaret of Anjou.
The princess came over to England early in the following
year, and was married on the 22nd April (1445).
The match was not altogether a popular one; nevertheless,
when Margaret passed through the city on
her way to be crowned at Westminster, she was received
"in the most goodly wise, with alle the
citezines on horseback ridyng ayenst hir to the
Blackheth in blew gownes and rede hodes."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of London (Nicholas), p. 134.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Jack Cade's rebellion, 1450.</note>

<p>The truce was renewed, and Suffolk increased in
popularity. After the deaths of Gloucester and
Cardinal Beaufort, within a few weeks of each other,
in 1447, he became the king's chief adviser, and continued
to be so until the loss of the French provinces
three years later (1450) raised so much opposition
against him that the king was compelled to order his
banishment. This was not thought a sufficient
punishment by his enemies, and he was taken on the
high seas and brutally murdered (2 May). After his
death an attack was made on his supporters. Again
the men of Kent rose in revolt; this time under the
leadership of an Irish adventurer&mdash;Jack Cade&mdash;who
called himself Mortimer, and gave out that he was an
illegitimate son of the late Earl of March. They
mustered on Blackheath 30,000 strong (1 June), and
then awaited the king's return from Leicester, where
parliament had been sitting. Henry on his arrival
sent to learn the reason of the gathering, and in
reply received a long list of grievances which the
rebels intended to amend.<note place="foot"><p>See "Historical Memoranda," by Stow, printed in "Three
Fifteenth Cent. Chron." (Camd. Soc., N.S., No. 28), pp. 94-99.</p></note>  Notwithstanding the<pb n="283" /><anchor id="Pg283" />
boldness of this answer, the king had only to make
proclamation that all his true and liege subjects should
"a-voyde the fylde," for the whole force to disperse
in the course of one night. The danger, indeed,
seemed to be over. A week later, however, the
royal force met a number of the rebels near Sevenoaks,
by whom it was put to rout. Encouraged by this
success, the rebels returned and took up their
quarters in Southwark. The unhappy king had by
this time retired to Kenilworth, notwithstanding the
offer made by the citizens of London to stand by him.<note place="foot"><p>"And the Meire of London with the comynes of the city came
to the kynge besekynge him that he wolde tarye in the cite, and they
wolde lyve and dye with him, and pay for his costes of householde an
halff yere; but he wold nott, but toke his journey to Kyllyngworthe."&mdash;"Three
Fifteenth Cent. Chronicles" (Camd. Soc.), p. 67.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city prepares to defend itself.</note>

<p>The city authorities had, in the meantime, taken
steps to put the city into a state of defence. A Common
Council met on the 8th June, when it decided
that an efficient guard should be placed night and day
upon all gates, wharves and lanes leading to the
Thames. An enclosure recently erected at "le Crane"
on the riverside belonging to John Trevillian, was
ordered to be abated. Balistic machines (<hi rend="font-style: italic">fundibula</hi>)
of all kinds were to be collected on the wharves,
whilst the sale of weapons or armour or their
removal out of the city was restricted. Lastly, it
was agreed to represent to the king the advisability
of limiting the number of his nobles coming into the
city, owing to the scarcity of provisions.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fo. 36b.</p></note> On the
26th June the Common Council again met, and it
was then decided to send two mounted men to reconnoitre
Cade's position, and to learn, if possible, his<pb n="284" /><anchor id="Pg284" />
movements.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fo. 39.</p></note> Three days later (29 June) orders were
given for four men to be selected from each ward to
assist the aldermen in preserving the peace. Anyone
refusing to do his duty in keeping watch was to be
sent to prison. In spite of all precautions, Cade and
his followers succeeded in gaining a footing in the city
(3 July), their first action being to sack the house of
Philip Malpas.<note place="foot"><p>He had been admitted alderman of Lime Street ward in 1448,
at the king's special request, and had only recently been discharged.&mdash;Journal
4, fo. 213b; Journal 5, fo. 38b. In 1461 he left England,
but was captured at sea by the French and put to ransom for 4,000
marks.&mdash;Fabyan, p. 638.</p></note> Cade himself encouraged rather
than restrained the excesses of his men. "Now is
Mortimer lord of the City," he cried as he struck with
his sword the old Roman mile-stone known as
London stone.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 224.</p></note> It is clear that the rebels had friends
in the city, otherwise they would never have effected
an entrance so easily&mdash;"They had othyr men with
hem as welle of London as of there owne party."<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., p. 192.</p></note>
The matter was made the subject of investigation by
the Common Council. Evidence was given by
Thomas Geffrey, a barber, to the effect that on
Friday, the 3rd July, the keys of the bridge had been
given up, but by whom he knew not. William
Reynold also deposed that Richard Philip, a grocer,
had told him that unless the wardens of the bridge
opened the gates, the Kentish captain threatened to
set fire to the bridge and the city, and that thereupon
Thomas Godfrey, a "sporyour," clad in russet,
brought the keys and opened the gates.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fo. 40b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Mock trials held by the rebels at the Guildhall.</note>

<p>On Saturday, the 4th of July, the rebels, who
had retired for the night, returned to the city.<pb n="285" /><anchor id="Pg285" /><index index="toc" level1="CAPTURE AND DEATH OF CADE." />
Robert Horne, alderman of Bridge Ward, who had
rendered himself especially obnoxious to the rebels,
was made prisoner and sent to Newgate. Sir James
Fiennes, the Lord Say, was brought from the Tower
to the Guildhall, where the rebels were holding mock
trials on those who were unfortunate enough to fall
into their hands, and, after a hasty examination, was
conveyed to the Standard in Chepe and there executed.
His head, together with those of two others who had
that day suffered a similar fate, was set up on London
Bridge.</p>

<note place="margin">Cade apprehended.</note>

<p>By the next evening (Sunday) the citizens had
managed to recover their presence of mind, and
sallied out at ten o'clock at night, under the leadership
of Lord Scales and another, across the bridge.
Before they had arrived on the Southwark side of the
river they were met by the rebels, and a severe fight
took place between the parties on the bridge itself,
lasting until eight o'clock the next morning. At last
the rebels were defeated, and the city freed from their
presence. Offers of pardon were made and accepted,
and the rebels dispersed. Cade, however, continued
to plunder and ravage the country, until a price having
been put upon his head, he was apprehended by the
Sheriff of Kent,<note place="foot"><p>Alexander Iden, who appears to have pursued Cade beyond the
limits of his own jurisdiction, as Sheriff of Kent, into the neighbouring
county of Sussex, where the rebel was apprehended in a garden at
Heathfield.&mdash;"Three Fifteenth Cent. Chron.," preface, p. vii.</p></note> and died the same night from injuries
received at his capture. His head was subsequently
set up on London Bridge.</p>

<note place="margin">The question of the succession to the throne.</note>

<p>The king had now been married some years, and
no heir had appeared. Great uncertainty prevailed<pb n="286" /><anchor id="Pg286" />
as to the right of succession to the throne, and gave
rise to much rivalry and mutual mistrust between
Richard, Duke of York, who now for the first time
becomes a conspicuous figure on the stage, and
Edmund Beaufort, recently created Duke of Somerset.
Both of them could claim to be the king's nearest kinsmen,
both of them being descendants of Edward III,
the one tracing his descent, on his father's side,
through Edmund Langley, and on his mother's side,
through Lionel, Duke of Clarence, whilst the other
was the surviving representative of John of Gaunt.</p>

<note place="margin">Rivalry between the Dukes of York and Somerset, 1450.</note>

<p>The king's incapacity to govern without a strong
minister at his back, as evinced by his conduct
during the recent outbreak, induced both of these
nobles to throw up their appointments, the one in
Ireland and the other in France, and to hasten home.
The Duke of York was the first to reach England,
and, in spite of measures which had been taken to
intercept him, made his way to London. He was
anxious in the first place to clear himself of suspicion
of having been implicated in Cade's rebellion,<note place="foot"><p>The exclusion of the Duke and other nobles from the king's
council had been made an express ground of complaint by the Kentish
insurgents.</p></note> and to
this end sought and obtained an interview with the
king. Having satisfied Henry on this point, he next
proceeded to demand the reform of certain abuses in
the government. A short session of parliament, which
met on the 6th November, opened with an altercation
between the rival dukes. On the 1st December
Somerset was placed under arrest; and on the following
day his lodgings at the Black Friars were broken
into and pillaged. An example was made of one of<pb n="287" /><anchor id="Pg287" /><index index="toc" level1="RIVALRY BETWEEN YORK ANS SOMERSET." />
the men convicted of being concerned in the breaking
into the Black Friars, and he was beheaded at the
Standard in Chepe. The Duke of York made a personal
visit to the city, and caused proclamation to
be made of the heavy pains and penalties which
should follow any attempt at robbery. As a further
demonstration against lawlessness, the king himself
rode through the city a few days later, accompanied
by his lords in full panoply, the route being kept by
a line of armed citizens on either side of the way.
Alderman Gregory, whose chronicle affords us a vivid
picture of contemporary events, and who was called
upon to serve the office of mayor of the city the
following year, confesses that the procession on this
occasion would have been a gay and glorious sight,
"if hit hadde ben in Fraunce, but not in Ingelonde,"
for it boded little good.<note place="foot"><p>Chron., p. 196.</p></note></p>

<p>The Duke of Somerset did not long remain in
prison, for immediately after Christmas he was appointed
captain of Calais. In 1451 the disasters
which followed the English arms in France, when
Calais was again threatened, were made an occasion
for another attempt by York to crush his rival. He
openly avowed his determination to proceed against
Somerset, and, joined by the Earl of Devonshire
and Lord Cobham, marched to London (Jan., 1452).
Henry at once prepared to march against his cousin.
The duke had hoped that through the influence of his
party within the city, the gates would have been
flung open on his approach. In this he was disappointed.
The majority of the citizens were still
loyal to Henry, and by his orders entrance was denied<pb n="288" /><anchor id="Pg288" />
the duke, who thereupon withdrew to Dartford, whilst
the king's forces encamped at Blackheath.</p>

<note place="margin">Civil war averted.</note>

<p>For a time civil war was avoided, the king
promising that Somerset should be again committed
to custody until he should answer such charges as York
should bring against him. The king, however, failed
to keep his word. Somerset was allowed to remain
in power, and York was only allowed his liberty after
he had consented to swear public allegiance to the
king in St. Paul's Church. Any stronger measures
taken against him would probably have provoked
disturbance in the city.<note place="foot"><p>"And so thei brought (the duke) ungirt thurgh London bitwene
ij bisshoppes ridyng unto his place; and after that made hym swere at
Paulis after theire entent, and put him frome his good peticions which
were for the comoen wele of the realme."&mdash;Chron. of London (Nicolas),
p. 138.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's illness, 1453.</note>

<p>Henry's mind had never been strong, and in the
following year (1453) it entirely gave way. In
October the queen bore him a son, after eight years
of married life, but though the infant was brought to
his father, Henry gave no signs of recognising his
presence. The illness of the king, and the birth of an
heir to the crown, were events which materially
affected the fortunes of the Duke of York. In November
the civic authorities prepared for emergencies;
every citizen was to provide himself with armour, but
he was strictly enjoined to be guarded in his conversation,
and not to provoke tumult by showing favour
to this or that lord. Even a proposal that the mayor
and aldermen should pay a visit of respect to the
Duke of York was rejected as impolitic at the present
juncture.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fos. 131, 132b, 133b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="289" /><anchor id="Pg289" />

<note place="margin">The City again called upon to assist in the defence of Calais, 1453-1454.</note>

<p>Notwithstanding liberal grants made by parliament
for the defence of Calais, that town was still in
danger. On the 29th November, 1453, a letter was
read before the Common Council of the City, emanating
from the Lord Welles and the Lord Ryvers,
asking for assistance towards putting Calais into a
state of defence. Further consideration of the matter
was adjourned until the following 4th December. By
the 7th day of the same month the Council had consulted
the commons, who had declared that owing to
their numerous burdens and expenses they could contribute
nothing to that end.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fos. 134b, 135b, 136.</p></note> This did not prevent a
further application being made early in 1454, for contributions
towards the defence of Calais if that town
were besieged.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 148.</p></note> Again the commons were consulted,
and again they pleaded the excessive burdens they
were already called upon to bear, and the losses they
had sustained by seizure of their ships and merchandise
by the Duke of Burgundy, rendering them unable for
the present to undertake any further charges unless
steps were taken for the recovery of their goods.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 152.</p></note> An
answer to this effect was accordingly delivered by the
Common Sergeant on behalf of the citizens, who declared
themselves willing at the same time to bear their
share with the rest of the realm.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 152b.</p></note> An appeal made in
August of the same year (1454), for the sum of £1,200
for the same purpose, met with similar failure.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 183, 184.</p></note></p>

<p>The plea of poverty was no idle one, if we may
judge from the fact that when, in November of this
year, an assessment of half a fifteenth was made on
the city wards, eleven out of twenty-five wards were<pb n="290" /><anchor id="Pg290" />
in default.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fo. 206.</p></note> Between the years 1431 and 1451 the
citizens had advanced large sums of money to the
king, of which more than £3,000 remained in the
latter year due to the city.<note place="foot"><p>Report of City Chamberlain to the Court of Common Council.&mdash;Journal
5, fos. 227-228b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Duke of York and his supporters take up their quarters in the city, 1454.</note>

<p>A crisis, in the meanwhile, was fast approaching.
The birth of an heir to the throne urged the Duke of
York to take prompt action. Although the majority
of the nobles were opposed to him, he had on his side
the powerful family of the Nevills, having married
Cicely Nevill, sister of Richard Nevill, Earl of Salisbury,
the head of the family, and father of the still
more powerful Earl of Warwick. Towards the end of
January (1454) the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury
and Warwick, and others of the duke's supporters,
entered the city, each followed by a large force of retainers
fully armed. With them came also York's eldest
son, the Earl of March, afterwards King Edward IV.<note place="foot"><p>News-letter of John Stodeley, 19 Jan., 1454; Paston Letters
(Gairdner), i, 265, 266.</p></note></p>

<p>The Common Council were anxious lest the presence
of these nobles in the city should lead to a disturbance.
A strict neutrality was ordered to be observed
both by the mayor and aldermen, as well as by
the inhabitants of the city at large. The <hi rend="font-style: italic">waytes</hi>, or
watchmen, were ordered to perambulate the streets
every night with their minstrels to keep the citizens in
good humour (<hi rend="font-style: italic">pro recreacione hominum</hi>), and prevent
robbery. Nevertheless, there is evidence to show
that disturbances did occasionally arise between the
inhabitants and those in the suite of the nobles.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fos 143, 145b, 152, 152b-160b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="291" /><anchor id="Pg291" /><index index="toc" level1="THE DUKE OF YORK NOMINATED PROTECTOR." />

<note place="margin">The Duke of York nominated protector, 1454.</note>

<p>The king's continued illness necessitated sooner
or later the appointment of a regent. For a brief
space there seemed a possibility of the regency being
claimed by the queen. The City, in the meanwhile,
paid court to both parties, the mayor and aldermen
one day paying a solemn visit to the queen, attired in
their gowns of scarlet, and a few days later paying a
similar compliment to the Duke of York.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fo. 150.</p></note> At length
the duke was nominated protector (3 April). Some
correspondence ensued between the City, the Duke
of York, the queen, and the Earl of Salisbury, on
what subject we know not,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 162, 162b.</p></note> but on the 13th May
the mayor and aldermen waited upon the duke to
thank him for his favour and goodwill.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 164b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The first battle of St. Albans, 22 May, 1455.</note>

<p>So long as the king remained an imbecile York
was supreme, his rival, Somerset, having been committed
to prison at his instigation in December, 1453.
Henry, however, soon recovered from his illness,
although his convalescence proved of equally short
duration, and York's protectorate came to an end.
With Henry's restoration came the release of Somerset,
and York determined to try conclusions with his
rival in the field. At the first battle of St. Albans,
fought on the 22nd May, 1455, victory declared for
York and Somerset was killed. After the battle
York accompanied the king to London and lodged
him in the bishop's palace in St. Paul's churchyard.
The excitement caused Henry a relapse, and York was
for the second time named protector; but in the
spring of 1456 he had again to retire upon the king's
recovery.</p>

<pb n="292" /><anchor id="Pg292" />

<note place="margin">A rising against the Lombards in the city, May, 1456.</note>

<p>Just when the country was settling down to enjoy
a period of comparative quiet, there occurred (May,
1456) in the city one of those sudden outbreaks
against the "merchant stranger" residing within the
city's walls which too often appear in the annals of
London. On this occasion the young mercers of the
city rose against the Lombards; why or wherefore
we are not told. We only know that these foreigners
received such bad treatment that they meditated
leaving the city in a body and setting up business
elsewhere. The fault was not altogether with the
citizens, it appears; for two Lombards were ordered
to be hanged.<note place="foot"><p>Booking to Paston, 15 May; Paston Letters (Gairdner), i, 387;
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Chron. of London (Nicolas), p. 139; Gregory's Chron., p. 199.</p></note></p>

<p>The king, who was at the time at Coventry&mdash;whither
the queen had caused him to be removed,
owing to her suspicion that the Londoners were in
favour of the Yorkist party&mdash;sent for alderman
Cantelowe,<note place="foot"><p>William Cantelowe, alderman of Cripplegate and Billingsgate
wards, from the latter of which he was discharged in October, 1461, on
the score of old age and infirmity (Journal 6, fo. 81b). He appears in
his time to have had financial dealings with the crown, on one occasion
conveying money over sea for bringing Queen Margaret to England,
and on another supplying gunpowder to the castle of Cherbourg, when
it was in the hands of the English. He is thought by some to be
identical with the William Cantelowe who afterwards (in 1464) captured
Henry VI in a wood in the North of England.&mdash;"Three Fifteenth
Cent. Chron." (Camd. Soc, N.S., No. 28), Preface, p. viii.</p></note> a mercer, and promptly committed him
to Dudley Castle for safe keeping, as having been
implicated in the attack on the houses of the Italian
merchants.</p>

<p>This outbreak was followed by another "hurlynge"
between the mercers of the city and those
Lombards who had consented to remain in the city on
the understanding that they should be allowed to ply<pb n="293" /><anchor id="Pg293" />
their business without molestation until the council or
parliament should determine otherwise. In consequence
of this second outbreak no less than 28 mercers
were arrested and committed to Windsor Castle.<note place="foot"><p>Short English Chron. (Camd. Soc., N.S., No. 28), p. 70.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Letter from the king for safe-guarding the city, 3 Sept., 1456.</note>

<p>On the 3rd September, 1456, the king wrote from
Lichfield to the Mayor, reminding him of the dangers
which had recently threatened the city&mdash;"the king's
chamber"&mdash;the government whereof ought to serve as
an example to the rest of the kingdom, and enjoining
him that thenceforth he should allow no one to enter
the city but such as came peaceably, and with
moderate retinue, according to his estate and degree,
and should take precautions against gatherings of
evil disposed persons which might lead to a breach
of the peace.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book K, fo. 287.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The citizens offer to man and victual ships to punish France, 1457.</note>

<p>Notwithstanding the precautions taken to protect
the coast, the French made a descent in 1457,
and plundered Sandwich and Fowey, capturing over
30 ships, great and small, and doing much damage.
The citizens of London, to whom the protection of
their commerce in the "narrow sea," as the channel
was then frequently called, was everything, thereupon
took counsel among themselves, and made a proposal
to the king and to Bishop Waynflete, the chancellor,
to find 2,000 men and provisions for certain ships then
lying in the Thames, at their own expense, to join an
expedition to punish the enemy for their boldness.
The king thanked them for their patriotic spirit and
gave orders for a naval force to join the city contingent
from Hull.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 288b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="294" /><anchor id="Pg294" />

<note place="margin">A general reconciliation at St. Paul's, 25 March, 1458.</note>

<p>In 1458 Henry tried his hand at effecting a
reconciliation between the two rival sections of the
nobility, and to this end ordered a great council to
meet in St. Paul's on the 27th January. Warwick
left his post at Calais, and came over to London to
attend the meeting; but he did not arrive until more
than a month after the appointed day, and when he
came it was with a body of 600 men at his back,
"all apparyled in reed jakkettes, with whyte ragged
stavis."<note place="foot"><p>Cotton MS., Vitell. A, xvi, fo. 114.</p></note> He took up his quarters within the city,
where he found the Duke of York and the Earl of
Salisbury. The young Duke of Somerset and other
lords, who, like him, had lost their fathers at the
battle of St. Albans, were refused an entrance to the
city for fear of a breach of the peace, and had to find
accommodation outside the city's walls.<note place="foot"><p>Engl. Chron., 1377-1461 (Camd. Soc., No. 64), p. 77.</p></note> During the
conference the mayor patrolled the streets by day,
whilst at night a force of 3,000 men was kept in
readiness to assist the aldermen in preserving the
king's peace.<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan, Chron. (ed. 1811), p. 633; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Chron. of London (Nicolas),
p. 139.</p></note> The times were critical, but at length
all ended well. A grand pacification took place in
March, and was solemnized by an imposing procession
to St. Paul's, in which York led the queen by the
hand. The reconciliation thus effected was more
apparent than real, and neither party relaxed their
efforts to prepare for renewed hostility.</p>

<note place="margin">Warwick implicated in a riot, Nov., 1458.</note>

<note place="margin">Seeks refuge in the city.</note>

<note place="margin">Leaves for Calais.</note>

<p>In August the civic companies were warned
against furnishing the confederate lords with any war
material, but were to keep their arms and harness at the<pb n="295" /><anchor id="Pg295" /><index index="toc" level1="A GENERAL RECONCILIATION AT ST. PAUL'S." />
disposal of the king alone.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fos. 138, 138b, 139.</p></note> It wanted very little to
kindle the smouldering embers of dissatisfaction into
a flame, and this little was soon forthcoming. In
November<note place="foot"><p>Engl. Chron., 1377-1461 (Camd. Soc., No. 64), p. 78; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Fabyan,
p. 633; Holinshed, iii, 249.</p></note> a riot occurred at Westminster, in which
the Earl of Warwick was implicated. A yeoman in
his suite picked a quarrel with one of the king's
servants and wounded him. Thereupon others of the
king's household, finding their fellow-servant wounded
and his enemy escaped, way-laid the earl and his
attendants as they left the council to take barge on
the river. By dint of hard hitting, the earl managed
to embark and to make his way to the city. But the
affray was not without bloodshed, and Warwick found
it convenient to withdraw soon afterwards to his post
at Calais, which thenceforth became the head-quarters
of the disaffected lords.</p>

<note place="margin">Riot between citizens and Templars, April, 1459.</note>

<p>In the following April (1459) another affray
broke out. This time it was between inhabitants of
the city and certain members of the Inns of Court,
and the riot was so dangerous as to result in loss of
life. The king hearing of this sent for William
Tayllour, the alderman of the ward, and kept him in
confinement at Windsor until the election of the new
mayor, William Hewlyn, in October, by whose intercession
he regained his freedom.<note place="foot"><p>Short Engl. Chron. (Camd. Soc., N.S., No. 28), p. 71; Chron.
of London (Nicolas), p. 140.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The battle of Blore Heath, 23 Sept., 1459.</note>

<p>By this time the country was again divided into
two hostile camps. A crisis came in September, when
the Earl of Salisbury, the king's most inveterate
enemy, marched upon Ludlow with a large force.<pb n="296" /><anchor id="Pg296" />
Lord Audley, sent by the queen to arrest him, was
defeated by the earl at Blore Heath (23 Sept., 1459).
Later on, however, the earl and the Yorkist army
were themselves compelled to seek security. The
Duke of York took refuge in Ireland, and the
Earl of Warwick, who had crossed from France to join
his father, returned to Calais, taking the Earl of Salisbury
with him.</p>

<note place="margin">Parliament at Coventry, 20 Nov., 1459.</note>

<p>On the 9th October the king issued his writ for
a parliament to be held at Coventry on the 20th
November. The usual writ was sent to the City
of London, but the names of the aldermen and commoners
elected to represent the citizens do not appear
in the City's records.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 166.</p></note> The business of the session
was the attainder of the Duke of York and his
followers, and judgment was passed upon the duke,
the Nevills, father and son, the young Earls of
March and Rutland, and others. Two days after the
date of this writ, the Common Council decided to send
a deputation to wait upon the king and assure him of
the City's allegiance and of the steps taken for its
safe custody.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 145.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king loses favour.</note>

<p>The citizens had previously (Oct., 1459) displayed
their willingness to assist the king by a gift of 1,000
marks.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 163.</p></note> This gift must have been the more welcome,
inasmuch as Henry's debts had been rapidly
on the increase, whilst his creditors remained unpaid.
The queen, on the other hand, into whose hands the
government of the kingdom had been drawn, was
"gaderyng riches innumerable." The imposition of
taxes, talliages and fifteenths, whilst harassing the<pb n="297" /><anchor id="Pg297" /><index index="toc" level1="COMMISSIONS OF ARRAY." />
king's subjects, seemed to make him not a whit the
richer, the issues and profits being frittered away.
They would have forgiven him had he maintained a
household in regal style or spent their money on
maintaining the country's honour in the field. As
matters were, Henry, by misgovernment, was rapidly
losing the hearts of his people, and "theyre blessyng
was turned in to cursyng."<note place="foot"><p>English Chron., 1377-1461 (Camd. Soc., No. 64), p. 179.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Unconstitutional conduct of the king in issuing commissions to raise an army, Jan., 1460.</note>

<note place="margin">A deputation from the City waits upon the king at Northampton.</note>

<note place="margin">The City's liberties not to be prejudiced.</note>

<p>On the 14th January, 1460, the king issued a
commission to the mayor, aldermen and sheriffs for
collecting men-at-arms and archers to resist the <hi rend="font-style: italic">late</hi>
Duke of York and the <hi rend="font-style: italic">late</hi> Earls of March, Warwick,
Salisbury and Rutland.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 224b.</p></note> Similar commissions were
addressed to every township,<note place="foot"><p>William Paston, writing to his brother John, under date 28th January,
1460, remarks, "Item, the kyng cometh to London ward, and, as
it is seyd, rereth the pepyll as he come; but it is certayn ther be comyssyons
made in to dyvers schyres that every man be redy in his best aray
to com when the kyng send for hem."&mdash;Paston Letters (Gairdner),
i, 506.</p></note> and did much harm to
the royal cause, now tottering to its fall, as being
unconstitutional. They formed the subject of one of
the set of articles of complaint drawn up by the Earls
of March, Warwick and Salisbury, and addressed by
them, on behalf of themselves and the Duke of York,
to the archbishop and the commons of England.<note place="foot"><p>Paston Letters (Gairdner), Introd., p. cxl.</p></note>
Such commissions the lords declared to be an imposition
which, if continued, would be "the heaviest
charge and worst example that ever grew in England."
The city authorities appear to have rested their opposition
to the king's commission, not so much on the
grounds that they were unwilling to raise a force for his<pb n="298" /><anchor id="Pg298" />
assistance, as that a demand for military aid in such a
form might derogate from the city's franchise and
liberties. A deputation, consisting of two aldermen,
Thomas Urswyk, the Recorder, and one of the under-sheriffs,
was sent to Northampton to wait upon the
king and council and to explain the views of the
citizens in that respect. The interview was of a satisfactory
character; and the deputation returned bearing
a gracious letter from the king declaring that the City's
franchise and liberties should in no way be prejudiced
by the commission.<note place="foot"><p>The king's letter, dated 2 Feb., was read before the Common
Council on the 5 Feb.&mdash;Letter Book K, fo. 313b; Journal 6, fo. 196b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Military precautions taken by the City, Feb., 1460.</note>

<p>The citizens deemed it time to look to their own
safety, and place their city into a better posture
of defence. The master and wardens of the livery
companies were exhorted (14 Feb., 1460), on account
of the disturbed state of the kingdom, to raise contributions
towards the purchase of accoutrements
for the safeguard of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 197b.</p></note> The king himself was
shortly coming into the city, and measures were taken
(28 Feb.) for placing a proper guard over the several
gates.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 203b.</p></note> On the 11th May the masters and wardens
were summoned, on behalf of the king, to appear
before the mayor and aldermen at the Guildhall, to
hear a royal proclamation read touching the preservation
of the king's peace.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 158.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Landing of the confederate earls.</note>

<p>The Yorkist Earls of Salisbury, Warwick and
March, encouraged by the reports of the state of
affairs in England, at length made up their minds to
return and strike a blow for the recovery of their<pb n="299" /><anchor id="Pg299" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE YORKISTS." />
estates, which had become forfeited to the king. They
set sail from Calais (26 June), and landing at Sandwich
made their way without opposition through
Kent to London.</p>

<note place="margin">The Common Council determine to oppose their entrance to the city, 27 June, 1460.</note>

<p>On the 27th June, by which time news of their
arrival must have reached the city, a Common
Council was held, when the commoners who were present
solemnly promised to stand by the mayor and
aldermen in safe-guarding the city, and resist with all
their might the rebels against the lord the king who
were about to enter the city contrary to the king's
orders. The civic companies somewhat tardily gave
their adhesion to the royal cause, and agreed to
defend the city. The gates were ordered to be
manned, and no one was to be allowed to enter without
first saying who and what he was. Strict
enquiry was to be made as to the character of
strangers residing within each of their wards.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 237.</p></note> On
the following day the Common Council met again
and gave orders that the drawbridge of London
Bridge should be always kept down, so that victuallers
and others might have ready access to the City,
but the gateway on the drawbridge was to be kept
closed, whilst <hi rend="font-style: italic">le wikett</hi> was to be constantly open.
A strict watch was to be kept on the new tower<note place="foot"><p>It had been destroyed by fire during the Kentish outbreak.&mdash;Gregory's
Chron., p. 193.</p></note>
above the bridge by men-at-arms stationed there,
who should also be ready to let down <hi rend="font-style: italic">le port Colyce</hi>
when occasion required.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 237b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Meeting of Common Council on Sunday, 29 June.</note>

<p>A deputation, moreover, was appointed to set
out to meet the Earls of March and Warwick on<pb n="300" /><anchor id="Pg300" />
their way to Northampton, for the purpose of inducing
them, if possible, to turn aside and not approach
the city. The members were instructed to inform
the lords of the king's commands to the citizens
to hold the city for him, and to oppose the lords'
entry under heavy penalty. This instruction to the
deputation was given, we are told, with the approval
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops
of Norwich, Ely and Exeter, and of the Prior of St.
John's, Clerkenwell. The mayor, aldermen and commonalty
agreed to stand by any terms which the
deputation might be compelled to make. They had
not taken this step without first consulting the Lords
Scales and Hungerford, and Sir Edmund Hampden,
who held the Tower of London for King Henry.
The bridge gate was ordered to be closed between
nine and ten o'clock on the night of the 28th, and to
remain closed till the morning. Even the portcullis
was to be kept down if necessary, whilst the mayor
and sheriffs, with a certain number of armed men,
patrolled the city, and the aldermen kept watch in
their several wards.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 238.</p></note> Notwithstanding the next day
being Sunday, the critical state of affairs necessitated
a meeting of the Common Council. It was then
agreed that if any messenger should arrive from Warwick,
no communication should be held with him.
Special watches were appointed for the bridge and
for Billingsgate by night and day, and so anxious
were the authorities to avail themselves of the
service of every abled citizen on that Sunday, that
no one was allowed to attend Divine Service at St.
Paul's.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 238b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="301" /><anchor id="Pg301" />

<note place="margin">The Yorkist earls admitted into the city, 2 July, 1460.</note>

<p>Up to this point the citizens had shown themselves
loyal to Henry. They now began to waver.
Early in the morning of the 30th June the mayor
and aldermen appear to have changed their minds.
The earls had sent them a letter and they resolved
to receive it. The contents of this letter are not
recorded. On the following day (1 July) another
communication from the earls was received. Here
again we are left in the dark as to its purport&mdash;the
City's journals at this period being very imperfect,&mdash;we
only know that they declined to accede to the request
to keep at a distance from London, for the very next
day (2 July) they were admitted into the city.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fos. 239, 239b; Eng. Chron., 1377-1461 (Camd. Soc.
No. 64), p. 94.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Tower holds out.</note>

<p>The city was thus lost to the king; but the Tower
still held out, and no amount of eloquence on the
part of certain doctors of divinity, whom the Common
Council had appointed to try and arrange matters so
as to avoid bloodshed, would induce Lord Scales and
his companions to surrender it, although the garrison
was hard pressed for victuals.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 252b.</p></note> Nothing was left but
to starve them out, and this the Earl of Salisbury
proceeded to do, with the aid of the citizens and the
boatmen on the river, by whom the Tower was
strictly invested by land and water. The Common
Council appear to have felt some qualms of conscience
in joining in this proceeding, for they caused it to be recorded&mdash;as
if by way of excuse for their action&mdash;that
"there seemed to be no other way of preserving the
city."<note place="foot"><p>Eo quod nullus alius modus videtur esse tutus pro civitate.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>,
fo. 251.</p></note> A resolution, moreover, that each alderman
should subscribe the sum of £5 towards raising a<pb n="302" /><anchor id="Pg302" />
force to intercept victuals on their way to the Tower
was rescinded.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 251b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Tower surrendered, 19 July.</note>

<note place="margin">Murder of Lord Scales.</note>

<p>By the 10th July matters had become so serious
with the beleaguered garrison, that a letter was sent
to the Common Council, signed by the Earl of Kendal,
Lord Scales, Lord Hungerford, Lord Lovell and Sir
Edmund Hampden, asking why war was thus being
made upon them. To this the Council replied that
the lords had brought it upon themselves by firing
on the citizens in the first instance, and taking provisions
from them without payment.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 250b.</p></note> At last the
garrison could hold out no longer, and the Tower was
surrendered (19th July). Lord Scales endeavoured to
take sanctuary at Westminster, but was seized by
river boatmen and barbarously murdered.<note place="foot"><p>Eng. Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 64), p. 98. The Thames boatmen
and sailors were almost as powerful and troublesome a body of men as
the London apprentices. The Common Council had recently (11th
July) endeavoured to subdue their turbulent spirit by the distribution
among them of a large sum of money (£100).&mdash;Journal 6, fo. 254.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Battle of Northampton, 10 July, 1460.</note>

<p>Meanwhile the Duke of York had managed to
raise a sum of money in the city;<note place="foot"><p>On the 4th July the Common Council voted the earls the sum of
£1,000 by way of loan.&mdash;Journal 6, fo. 253.</p></note> the battle of
Northampton had been won and lost (10th July),
and Henry had been brought a prisoner to London
(16th July). On the same day that the king arrived
in London, the mayor, aldermen and commonalty of
the City entered into an agreement, under the Common
Seal, to abide by any arrangement made between
the Earl of Salisbury and the beleaguered lords in the
Tower for the surrender of that stronghold.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 256. By some inadvertence two copies of the
agreement were sealed, one of which was returned to the mayor to be
cancelled.</p></note></p>

<pb n="303" /><anchor id="Pg303" /><index index="toc" level1="THE DUKE OF YORK CLAIMS THE CROWN." />

<note place="margin">Measures for restoring confidence in the city.</note>

<p>On the 21st July the king, or the Earl of Warwick,
in his name, attempted to restore quiet in the city by
promising that those who had offended against the
king's highness and the common weal of the realm,
and had been committed to the Tower, should forthwith
receive ample justice. In the meantime all
conventicles, assemblies or congregations in breach of
the peace were strictly forbidden, and every man was
exhorted to repair to his own house, and wait upon
his lord or master in whose service he might happen
to be.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 257.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Parliament of 7 Oct., 1460.</note>

<note place="margin">The Duke of York's claim to the throne allowed.</note>

<note place="margin">The Livery Companies declare their allegiance to the king.</note>

<p>In October the Duke of York attended parliament
and boldly asserted his right to the throne.
After hearing arguments for and against his claim,
parliament arrived at a compromise by which the
reversion of the crown was settled on the duke, and
to this the king himself was forced to give his assent.<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., p. 208; Engl. Chron., pp, 99-100; Short Engl.
Chron., p. 75.</p></note>
It was otherwise with the proud and defiant Queen
Margaret. She was determined to acquiesce in no
such arrangement. Whilst she was collecting a force
in the north, wherewith to strike one blow for the
crown of which her son appeared likely to be robbed,
the mayor and aldermen held an extraordinary meeting
of the wardens of the livery companies. The
king wished to be assured of the temper of the citizens.
Would they as a body support him and his council,
protect his royal person, and defend the city against
those who were raising disturbances in divers parts of
the realm? To each and all of these questions the wardens
are recorded as having given satisfactory replies,<pb n="304" /><anchor id="Pg304" />
and it was then and there agreed that each alderman
should make enquiry as to the number of strangers
residing in his ward, and the reasons for their being
in the city. Watch was to be kept by night in every
ward, a lantern hung outside every dwelling-house,
and the city's gates were to be closed every night and
guarded by men-at-arms.<note place="foot"><p>The interview with the wardens of the companies took place at
a Common Council held on the 13th December, 1460.&mdash;Journal 6,
fo. 282b.</p></note> Although these measures
were avowedly taken on behalf of King Henry, they
were, in reality, so many precautions for securing the
government in the hands of his rival the Duke of
York.</p>

<note place="margin">The battle of Wakefield, 29 Dec., 1460.</note>

<p>The struggle which hitherto had been between
two unequal sections of the nobility, each avowing its
loyalty to the king, now became a struggle between
the two rival Houses of Lancaster and York.
Richard, Duke of York, did not live to enjoy the
crown, his right to the reversion of which had recently
been acknowledged by parliament. Just as the year
was drawing to a close he met his death at Wakefield
in the first clash with the House of Lancaster, and his
head in mockery was set up on one of the city's
gates from which he derived his ducal title.</p>

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">"Off with his head, and set it on York's gates;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">So York may overlook the town of York."</l>
</lg>

<note place="margin">The second battle of St. Albans, 17 Feb., 1461.</note>

<p>When Henry was once restored to liberty and to
his queen, after the second battle of St. Albans
(17 Feb., 1461), York's son, Edward, Earl of March,
who became by his father's death heir to the crown,
was immediately proclaimed traitor in the city.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 13.</p></note> The<pb n="305" /><anchor id="Pg305" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON FORSAKEN BY HENRY." />
queen wished for victuals to be sent from the city to
her forces at St. Albans, but the carts were seized
before they left the city by a mob which refused to
let them go in spite of the mayor's entreaties and
threats. Margaret's army consisted for the most part
of rude northern followers who threatened to sack
the city if once allowed within its walls, and the
majority of the inhabitants were unwilling to supply
the queen with provisions until she had removed her
half-disciplined force to a distance from London.
With a civilized army at her back it might have been
possible for Margaret to have gained a footing in the
city.<note place="foot"><p>The governing body in the city was still Lancastrian at heart. On
the 13th Feb. the Common Council had voted Henry, at that time in
the hands of Warwick, a loan of 1,000 marks, and a further sum of 500
marks (making in all £1,000) for the purpose of <hi rend="font-style: italic">garnysshyng</hi> and safeguarding
the city. On the 24th a certain number of aldermen and
commoners were deputed to answer for the safe custody of the Tower,
and on the following day (25 Feb.) the mayor forbade, by public
proclamation, any insult being offered to Sir Edmund Hampden and
others, who had been despatched by the king and queen to London for
the purpose of ascertaining "the true and faithful disposition" of the
city.&mdash;Journal 6, fos. 35, 35b, 40.</p></note> As matters stood, she deemed it best to accede
to the request thus made to her, and to draw off her
army.</p>

<note place="margin">The Earls of March and Warwick admitted into the city, Feb., 1461.</note>

<p>It was a fatal mistake, for it gave time for Edward
and Warwick to join forces and march on London.
The civic authorities, finding how hopeless it was to
place further dependence upon Henry, and desiring
above all things a stronger government than they
could look for under the king, now surrendered the
city to his opponents. They had not forsaken the
king&mdash;he had forsaken them. They would no more
of him.</p>

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">"He that had Londyn for sake,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 4">  Wolde no more to hem take."<note place="foot"><p>Gregory's Chron., p. 215.</p></note></l>
</lg>

<pb n="306" /><anchor id="Pg306" />

<note place="margin">Edward's claim to the crown recognised, 1 March, 1461.</note>

<p>On the 1st March the chancellor called a general
assembly of the citizens at Clerkenwell, and explained
to them the title by which Edward, Duke of York,
laid claim to the crown.<note place="foot"><p>Stubbs, Const. Hist., iii, 189.</p></note> His title was thereupon
acknowledged with universal applause, and on the
4th he proceeded to Westminster Palace, accompanied
by many of the nobility and commons of the realm,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 6, fo. 37b.</p></note>
and was there proclaimed king by the name of
Edward IV.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="307" /><anchor id="Pg307" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XII.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="CHARTERS OF EDWARD IV TO THE CITY." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">The accession of King Edward IV, March, 1461.</note>

<p>The new king made himself very popular with
the citizens. He was not less a favourite with them
because he joined their ranks and became a trader
like themselves, or because he took a wife from among
his own subjects and made her a sharer of his crown.
At the coronations, both of Edward and his queen,
which took place after an interval of three years,
the City was fully represented, and its claim
to services at the king's coronation banquet duly
acknowledged.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book L, fo. 4; Lib. Dunthorn, fo. 62; Journal 7, fo. 98.</p></note> At the latter ceremony no less than
four citizens, among them being Ralph Josselyn,
the mayor, were created Knights of the Bath.<note place="foot"><p>Short English Chron. (Camd. Soc., N.S., No. 28), p. 80.</p></note> The
citizens had previously shown their respect to Elizabeth
Woodville by riding forth to meet her and escorting
her to the Tower on her first arrival to London, and by
presenting her with a gift of 1,000 marks or £750.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fos. 97b, 98.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward's first charter to the city, 26 Aug., 1461.</note>

<p>If the young and handsome prince who now ascended
the throne occasionally carried his familiarity
with the wives of city burgesses beyond the limits of
strict propriety, much could be forgotten and forgiven
for the readiness he showed to confirm and enlarge
the City's privileges and to foster the trade of the
country. Before he had been on the throne many
months he granted the citizens, by charter, the right<pb n="308" /><anchor id="Pg308" />
of package and scavage, as well as the office of gauger
of wines.<note place="foot"><p>Charter, dat. Winchecombe, 26 Aug., 1461. Preserved at the
Guildhall (Box No. 28).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Second charter of Edward IV, 25 March, 1462.</note>

<p>In the following March (1462) he confirmed the
charter granted to the City by Henry IV, whereby the
citizens obtained the right of taking toll and custom
at Billingsgate, Smithfield and elsewhere, as well as
the right of <hi rend="font-style: italic">tronage</hi> or weighing wool at the Tron.<note place="foot"><p>Inspeximus charter, dated Westminster, 25 March, 1462.  Preserved
at the Guildhall (Box No. 13).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">City Loans, 1462.</note>

<p>In August, 1462 Calais was again in danger, and
the king wanted money. The Earl of Worcester and
others of the council were sent into the city to ask
for a loan of £3,400. After considering the matter,
the civic authorities agreed to lend him £1,000. The
money was to be raised by assessment on the wards,
but Dowgate ward being at the time very poor, was
not to be pressed.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fo. 8.</p></note> In the following October the City
again came to the king's assistance with a further loan
of 2,000 marks,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 15.</p></note> and on the 9th November the City
obtained (in return, shall we say?) a charter confirming
its jurisdiction over the Borough of Southwark,<note place="foot"><p>See Inspeximus charter 15 Charles II.</p></note>
originally granted by Edward III. Again, the coincidence
of a charter granted by the king to the City,
with a loan or gift from the City to the king, is remarkable.</p>

<note place="margin">The king's reception in the city on his return from the North, Feb., 1463.</note>

<p>When Edward returned in February, 1463, from
the North, where he had succeeded with the assistance
afforded him by the Londoners in re-capturing most
of the castles which the restless Margaret had taken,<pb n="309" /><anchor id="Pg309" />
the City resolved to give him a befitting reception.
Preparations were made for the mayor, aldermen and
commons to ride forth to meet him in their finest
liveries, but the king having expressed his intention of
coming from Shene to the city by water, the citizens
went to meet him in their barges, with all the pomp
and ceremony of a Lord Mayor's day.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fo. 21b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Estrangement of Warwick, 1464-1468.</note>

<p>Edward now gave himself up to a life of luxury
and pleasure. In 1464 he married the young widow
of Sir John Grey, better known by her maiden name
of Elizabeth Woodville. His marriage to her gave
offence to the nobility, more especially to the Earl of
Warwick, who was planning at the time a match with
France or Burgundy, and to whom the news of the
marriage with one so beneath the king in point of
dignity came as an unpleasant surprise. The earl
was still more offended when he learnt that the young
king had secretly effected a marriage treaty between
his sister Margaret (whom Warwick had destined for
one of the French princes) and the Duke of Burgundy.
These matrimonial alliances, combined with the inordinate
favour Edward displayed towards his wife's
family, led to an estrangement between the king and
his powerful subject.</p>

<note place="margin">Alliance between England and Burgundy, 1468.</note>

<p>The proposed alliance with Burgundy was far
from being distasteful to the merchants of the city,
inasmuch as it was likely to open up trade with those
states of the Low Countries which the Burgundian
dukes had consolidated as a barrier against France.
When the Princess Margaret was about to start (June,
1468) for her future husband's dominions, the mayor<pb n="310" /><anchor id="Pg310" />
and aldermen of London testified their appreciation
of the alliance by presenting her with a pair of silver
gilt dishes, weighing 19 lbs. 8 oz., besides the sum of
£100 in gold, by way of a wedding gift.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fo. 175.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Renewal of the civil war, 1469.</note>

<p>Disgusted with the king's unhandsome conduct
towards him, Warwick found an ally in Clarence, the
king's brother, gave him one of his daughters in marriage,
and even encouraged him to hope for the
succession to the crown. Edward's extravagant and
luxurious life had lost him much of his popularity.
He had ceased, moreover, to possess the goodwill of
the citizens for having allowed the arrest of Sir Thomas
Cooke or Coke,<note place="foot"><p>Ancestor of Lord Bacon and others of the nobility.&mdash;See Orridge
"Citizens and their Rulers," p. 222.</p></note> an alderman of the city, on a false
charge of treason. Notwithstanding his acquittal,
Cooke had been committed to prison and only
regained his liberty on payment of an extortionate
fine to the king and queen.<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan, p. 656. He was deprived of his aldermanry (Broad Street
Ward) by the king's orders.&mdash;Journal 7, fo. 128.</p></note> Warwick and Clarence
made use of the general discontent that prevailed to
further their own designs, and the civil war was
renewed. The City endeavoured to steer a middle
course. In June (1469) it lent the king the sum of
£200, but in the following month it lent Warwick and
Clarence just five times that amount on the sole
security of some jewels of little value.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fos. 196, 198, 199.</p></note> In May, 1470,
when there seemed little hope of the jewels being
redeemed, as Warwick and Clarence had been obliged
to flee to France, the Common Council entertained
the thought of selling them for what they were worth.<pb n="311" /><anchor id="Pg311" /><index index="toc" level1="RENEWAL OF THE CIVIL WAR." />
The sale did not take place, however, but they were
kept some in the "Treasury," and some in the custody
of William Taillour, late mayor, on the express understanding
that he was not to be held responsible in the
event of their being stolen or taken by force.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fos. 215b, 222b.</p></note> In
February, 1471, when the wheel of fortune had once
more placed Henry VI on the throne from which
he had been driven by Edward, and Warwick and
Clarence were again in power, the mayor and aldermen
caused it to be placed on record that the
loan on the jewels had been made by agreement of
the whole court, with the assistance of certain commoners
who had been called in to contribute. What
their object was in so doing is not clear. Perhaps
they felt some qualms as to what Edward might say
or do in respect of the loan, should he again return to
power. They, at the same time, extended the time
for the repayment of the loan, at the desire of the
dukes of Clarence and Warwick. If the jewels were
not redeemed by Whitsuntide at the latest, they were
to be sold.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 229b, 230b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Flight of Edward and restoration of Henry VI, Oct., 1470.</note>

<p>Whilst Warwick and Clarence were in France in
1470, they concerted measures with Queen Margaret
for effecting another revolution. By September
matters were ready for execution. On the 13th
Warwick landed in England; and before the end of
the month the Kentish men so threatened the City
and Westminster, that the newly-elected sheriffs had
to be escorted by an armed force in order to be sworn
in at the Exchequer, whilst a constant patrol was kept
in the streets.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 222b.</p></note> On the 1st October it was made
known in the city that the king had taken flight.<pb n="312" /><anchor id="Pg312" />
His queen took sanctuary at Westminster, leaving the
Tower in the hands of the mayor and aldermen and
members of the council of Warwick and Clarence.
The unfortunate Henry was quickly removed from
the wretched cell in which he had so long been confined
to a commodious and handsomely furnished
apartment which the queen herself, being <hi rend="font-style: italic">enceinte</hi> at
the time, purposed occupying when she should be
brought to bed. A garrison was placed in the Tower
by order of the Common Council, sitting, for safety's
sake, in the church of St. Stephen, Walbrook. On the
5th October Archbishop Nevill, Warwick's brother,
entered the city with a strong force and relieved the
civic authorities of the custody of the Tower, and on
the following day Warwick himself appeared, accompanied
by Clarence and a large following, and removed
Henry from the Tower to the Bishop of London's
palace.<note place="foot"><p>A record of what took place in the city between the 1st and 6th
October is set out in Journal 7, fo. 223b.</p></note> Two days later (9 Oct.) he obtained from
the Common Council the sum of £1,000 for the
defence of his stronghold, Calais, besides a loan of
£100 from the aldermen of the city for his own
private use.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 225.</p></note> On the 18th the Earl of Worcester,
Edward's constable and minister of his cruelties,<note place="foot"><p>He had, after Warwick's flight to France in March of this year,
put to death and impaled twenty of the earl's followers.&mdash;Warkworth's
Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 10), p. 9.</p></note> was
beheaded on Tower Hill, the ground being kept by
the Sheriffs of London and a contingent from the
several wards.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fo. 225.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Sir Thomas Cooke or Coke, late alderman.</note>

<p>In November Henry was made to hold a parliament,
and Sir Thomas Cooke, the deposed alderman,<pb n="313" /><anchor id="Pg313" /><index index="toc" level1="HENRY VI RESTORED TO THE CROWN." />
lost no time in presenting a bill for the restoration of
his lands, which had been seized by the queen's father,
Lord Rivers. He would probably have been successful
had fortune continued to favour King Henry, for,
besides being a member of parliament, he was, writes
Fabyan (a brother alderman), "a man of great boldnesse
in speche, and well spoken and syngulerly
wytted and well reasoned."<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan Chron., p. 660.</p></note> John Stokton had
recently been elected mayor, but there is reason for
believing that he, like other aldermen, preferred
Edward on the throne, licentious and extravagant
as he was, to an imbecile like Henry. He fell ill,
or, as Fabyan puts it, feigned sickness and took
to his bed, and Cooke assumed the duties of the
mayoralty. At Edward's restoration Cooke had to
seek refuge in France, but he was taken at sea before
he could reach the continent. The same fate might
have awaited Stokton had he shown himself less
cautious at that critical time.</p>

<note place="margin">Edward recovers the throne, April, 1471.</note>

<p>That the aldermen and the better class of citizens
favoured Edward, is shown by the ease with which
he effected an entry into the city when he returned
to England in the spring of the following year (1471).
The gates, we are told, were opened to him by
Urswyk, the Recorder, and certain aldermen (their
names are not mentioned), who took advantage of
the inhabitants being at dinner to let in Edward.<note place="foot"><p>Warkworth's Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 10), p. 15.&mdash;According to the
chronicler, the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Commons</hi> of the city were still loyal to Henry, whom
Archbishop Nevill had carried through the streets, weak and sickly as
he was, in the hope of exciting the sympathy of the burgesses. Had
the archbishop been a true man, "as the Commons of London were,"
Edward would not have gained an entry into the city until after the
victory of Barnet-field.</p></note>
Two days later, having recruited his forces, Edward<pb n="314" /><anchor id="Pg314" />
marched out of the city, with Henry in his train, to
meet Warwick. He encountered him on Easter Day
(14 April) at Barnet, and totally defeated him, both
the earl and his brother being left dead on the field.
By this time Margaret had landed with a fresh army;
but a crushing defeat inflicted upon her at Tewkesbury
(4 May) left Edward once more master of the
kingdom.</p>

<note place="margin">The Kentish rising under "bastard" Fauconberg, May, 1471.</note>

<note place="margin">Attack made on the City.</note>

<p>For a short time the city lay in some peril whilst
Edward was engaged with Warwick and Margaret.
The men of Kent again became troublesome. They
affected not to believe that Warwick had actually
fallen at Barnet. Under the leadership of Thomas
Fauconberg or Falconbridge, generally spoken of as
the "bastard," being a natural son of William Nevill,
first Lord Fauconberg, Earl of Kent, they marched to
London, with the intention of releasing Henry from
confinement and placing him again on the throne.
Fauconberg, who had been made a freeman of the
City in 1454,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 5, fos. 152, 175.</p></note> assumed the title of captain of King
Henry's people in Kent, and on the 8th May wrote
from Sittingbourne to inform the inhabitants of the
city that he had undertaken the cause of Henry
against the "usurper" Edward, and to ask to be
allowed to pass through the city with his followers,
whom he promised to hold in restraint and prevent
doing any mischief. He had written to the mayor
and aldermen to the same effect, and had desired to
have a reply sent to him at Blackheath by a certain
day and hour. To this letter the mayor and aldermen
sent an answer on the following day, to the effect
that when Edward left the city, after the battle of<pb n="315" /><anchor id="Pg315" /><index index="toc" level1="THE &quot;BASTARD&quot; FAUCONBERG." />
Barnet, to follow the movements of Margaret and
endeavour to bring about an action before she could
completely rally her forces, he had charged them on
their allegiance to hold the city of London for him,
and for none other. For that reason they dared not,
neither would they, suffer him to pass through the
city. They hesitated to accept his assurance as to
the peaceable behaviour of his followers, judging from
past experience. As for the statement he had caused
to be published, that he held a commission as captain
of the Navy of England and men of war by sea and
land under the Earl of Warwick, whom he still supposed
to be alive, they assured him that the earl was
dead, and that his corpse, as well as the corpse of
Montague, the earl's brother, had been exposed to
view for two days in St. Paul's. They gave him the
names of some of the chief men who had fallen at
Tewkesbury, obtained, they assured him, not from
hearsay but from eye-witnesses&mdash;special war correspondents,
whom the City had despatched for the
express purpose of reporting on the state of the field,
and they concluded by exhorting him to do as they
themselves had done, and to acknowledge Edward IV
as the rightful king. They would even plead for royal
favour on his behalf, but as to letting him and his host
pass through the city, that was out of the question.<note place="foot"><p>The "bastard's" letter and the reply of the mayor and aldermen
are set out in Journal 8, fos. 4b-6b, and Letter Book L, fo. 78.</p></note>
Having despatched this answer to Fauconberg, the
civic fathers at once set to work to fortify the river's
bank from Castle Baynard to the Tower, where lay
the rebels' fleet. On Sunday, the 12th May, the
Kentish men tried to force London Bridge and set<pb n="316" /><anchor id="Pg316" />
fire to some beer-houses near Saint Katherine's
Hospital. The attack was renewed on the following
Tuesday, whilst portions of the rebel force, amounting
it was said to 5,000 persons, were told off to try and
force the gates of Aldgate and Bishopsgate. There,
however, they were repulsed, and nearly 300 of them
met their death, either in actual fight or in their
endeavours to get on board their boats at Blackwall.
Urswyk, the city's Recorder, as well as Robert Basset,
alderman of Aldgate Ward, showed conspicuous valour
in the fight which took place in that quarter.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 323; Fabyan, p. 662.&mdash;According to Warkworth
(p. 19), the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Commons</hi> would willingly have admitted the rebels had
the latter not attempted to fire Aldgate and London Bridge.</p></note> The
city was never again troubled by Fauconberg. After
much wandering he was taken prisoner at Southampton,
and thence conveyed to Middleham, in Yorkshire,
where he was beheaded. His head was afterwards
sent to London and set up on London Bridge, "looking
into Kentward."<note place="foot"><p>Paston Letters, iii, 17.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward's return to London, and death of Henry VI, May, 1471.</note>

<p>On the night after Edward's return<note place="foot"><p>The 21st May is the day usually given as that on which Edward
returned. The City's Journal, however, gives the day as the Eve of the
Ascension, that festival falling on May the 23rd.&mdash;Journal 8, fo. 7.</p></note> in triumph
to London, Henry VI ended his life in the Tower,
murdered, in all probability, at the instance of the
Duke of Gloucester, the king's brother, afterwards
King Richard III. His remains lay in state at St.
Paul's and at the Blackfriars a short while, and were
then carried to Chertsey to be buried.<note place="foot"><p>Warkworth's Chron., p. 21.</p></note> Edward distributed
honours among his supporters in the city with
a lavish hand. Not only did the Lord Mayor&mdash;the
cautious Stokton&mdash;receive the honour of knighthood,<pb n="317" /><anchor id="Pg317" /><index index="toc" level1="RESTORATION OF EDWARD IV." />
but the aldermen<note place="foot"><p>Namely, Richard Lee, Matthew Philip, Ralph Verney, John
Young, William Tailour, George Irlond, William Hampton, Bartholomew
James, Thomas Stalbrok, and William Stokker.&mdash;Journal 8, fo. 7.</p></note> besides, whilst the city's doughty
Recorder was soon afterwards raised to be Baron of
the Exchequer. The City was so pleased with its
Recorder that it voted him a pipe of wine annually,
but the gift was not to be drawn into precedent.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 7, fo. 246.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Birth of Edward V.</note>

<p>The rest of Edward's reign was undisturbed by
any attempt to unseat the new dynasty, and his position
was rendered the more secure by the birth of
a son (afterwards Edward V) in the sanctuary of Westminster,
whither his wife Elizabeth had fled for refuge.
Before the young Prince of Wales was five years old
he received the honour of knighthood at Westminster.
The mayor and aldermen went to meet him on his
way from the city to Westminster on that occasion,
clad in scarlet robes, whilst the streets from Bishopsgate
to Saint Paul's were thronged with the commons in
their livery.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, 8, fo. 98.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The invasion of France, 1475.</note>

<p>Edward was now free to carry out his foreign
policy. Parliament voted supplies to enable him to
make war with France, but these were not sufficient,
and he had recourse to a system of "benevolences"
or free gifts, which few, however, dared to refuse. On
the 30th May, 1475, he left the Bishop of London's
palace in St. Paul's Church-yard, and, passing through
Cheapside to London Bridge, took boat to Greenwich
for the purpose of crossing over to France. The
livery companies turned out to do him honour.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 101.</p></note> The
expedition ended without a blow, Edward allowing<pb n="318" /><anchor id="Pg318" />
himself to be bought off with a sum of 75,000 crowns
paid down and a pension of 50,000 more. On his
return he was met at Blackheath by the mayor
and aldermen in scarlet gowns, with their servants in
gowns of "musterdevilers," accompanied by more than
600 members of the companies in gowns of bright
murrey.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 8, fo. 110b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Edward and the citizens.</note>

<p>By resorting again to benevolences and exacting
money from the City in return for charters, Edward
avoided the necessity of summoning parliament between
the years 1478 and 1483. On the 25th May,
1481, the king granted the City a general pardon,<note place="foot"><p>Preserved at the Guildhall (Box No. 28).</p></note> and
in the following month the City returned the compliment
by a loan of 5,000 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 8, fo. 244.</p></note> This loan was not
only repaid, but the king in the next year extended
his hospitality to the City by giving a large number of
citizens a day's hunting in Waltham forest, and afterwards
regaling them and their wives with venison and
wine.<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan, p. 667.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A famine threatened, 1482.</note>

<p>The close of the year 1482 witnessed such a
dearth of cereals that the exportation of wheat or
other grain was absolutely forbidden. It was feared
that a famine might arise in the City of London, so
vast had its population become, both from the influx
of nobles who had taken up their quarters within its
walls as well as of strangers from foreign lands.
Merchants were therefore encouraged to send their
grain to London by a promise that it should not be
intercepted by the king's purveyors.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, dated 21 Nov., 22 Edw. IV.&mdash;Letter Book L, fo.
281b; Journal 9, fo. 2.</p></note></p>

<pb n="319" /><anchor id="Pg319" /><index index="toc" level1="ACCESSION OF EDWARD V." />

<note place="margin">Edward's last parliament, 1483.</note>

<p>The names of the City's representatives who
attended the parliament which met in January, 1483,
are not recorded, but we have the names of four
aldermen and five commoners, who were appointed
in the previous month of December to confer with
the City members on matters affecting the City.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 12.</p></note> In
addition to parliamentary grants of a fifteenth and
tenth, and a renewal of the tax on aliens, the
citizens agreed to lend the king the sum of £2,000,
each alderman to lay down 50 marks and 80 commoners
to subscribe £15 a piece.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 14.</p></note> Some difficulty
was experienced in raising the money, and the names
of eleven persons who had refused to contribute were
forwarded to the king.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 14b.</p></note> A little more than a month
elapsed and Edward was dead.</p>

<note place="margin">Preparations for the coronation of Edward V.</note>

<p>The coronation of the young prince who now
succeeded to his father's throne, only to occupy it however
for a few weeks, was fixed to take place on the first
Sunday in May; and on the 19th April the City was
busy making arrangements for the prince's reception.
It was decided that the mayor and aldermen should
ride forth to meet the king, clad in gowns of scarlet,
their attendants being provided with gowns of the
colour of lion's-foot (<hi rend="font-style: italic">pied de lyon</hi>), at the public cost.
Five sergeants-at-mace belonging to the mayor, and
nineteen sergeants-at-mace in the service of the
sheriffs, were also to ride out to meet the king, clad
in gowns of the last-mentioned colour. The sword-bearer
was to be provided with a gown of murrey, and
a deputation from the civic guilds, to the number of
410 persons, clad in gowns of the same colour, was to
join the cavalcade.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 18, 18b.</p></note> On the 14th May they rode out<pb n="320" /><anchor id="Pg320" />
to Hornsey, where they met the prince and his uncle,
the Duke of Gloucester, and escorted them to the
city. The duke was the same day appointed Protector,
to the great disappointment of the queen, who again
took sanctuary at Westminster. She was induced
shortly afterwards to give up possession of her younger
son, the Duke of York, and he and Prince Edward
were lodged in the Tower by order of Gloucester, who
took up his quarters at Crosby Palace, the mansion
house of Sir John Crosby, in Bishopsgate Street.</p>

<p>Although preparations had been made for the
coronation, and the City had appointed representatives
from the livery companies to assist the chief butler at
the banquet<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 21b.</p></note> according to custom, that ceremony
never took place. Gloucester feared that if once the
young king was crowned, the project which he had
already begun to entertain of transferring the crown
to his own head would be less capable of realization.
Although he took an oath of allegiance to the new
king,<note place="foot"><p>The oath taken by Gloucester to King Edward V, as well as the
oath which he was willing to take to the queen, if she consented to quit
Westminster, were read before the Common Council on the 23rd March.&mdash;Journal
9, fo. 23b.</p></note> it was not long before he determined to feel the
pulse of the citizens as to their feelings towards himself
as a claimant of the crown.</p>

<note place="margin">Shaw's sermon at Paul's Cross, Sunday, 22 June, 1483.</note>

<p>In order to do this he called to his assistance
Dr. Shaw, an eminent preacher, whose brother, Sir
Edmund Shaa, or Shaw, happened to be mayor at the
time. Acting upon instructions from Gloucester,
Shaw preached a sermon at Paul's Cross on Sunday,
the 22nd June (1483), in which he charged the late
king with bigamy, Edward IV having, as he declared,<pb n="321" /><anchor id="Pg321" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE DUKE OF GLOUCESTER." />
made a contract of marriage with one of his mistresses
before he married Elizabeth Woodville, and this being
the case the late king's children by her were illegitimate,
and Gloucester was the rightful heir to the
throne. It was arranged that at this point in his
discourse Gloucester himself should appear on the
scene, coming up, as if by chance, from his lodgings
at Castle Baynard. By some mischance the duke
failed to appear at the proper moment, and the effect
was lost. The citizens sat stolidly silent, not a single
cry being raised in favour of Gloucester.</p>

<note place="margin">The Duke of Buckingham at the Guildhall, 24 June, 1483.</note>

<p>Nothing daunted by this dismal failure, Gloucester
made another and more successful attempt to win over
the citizens. On the following Tuesday (24 June) he
sent the Duke of Buckingham to harangue the citizens
at the Guildhall. The duke began by reminding his
hearers of the danger to which their wives and
daughters had been exposed under the late king; of
the undue influence exercised at court by Jane Shore,<note place="foot"><p>Wife of Matthew Shore, a respectable goldsmith of Lombard
Street:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">"In Lombard-street, I once did dwelle,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">As London yet can witness welle;</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Where many gallants did beholde</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">My beautye in a shop of golde."</l>
</lg>

<p rend="text-align: right">(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Percy Reliques</hi>).</p>

<p>She had recently been made to do penance by Gloucester in a white
sheet for practising witchcraft upon him; but her unhappy position, as
well as her well-known charity in better days, gained for her much
sympathy and respect.</p></note>
one only of a number of respectable women whom
Edward, he said, had seduced; of the excessive taxes
and illegal extortions by way of "benevolences" they
had recently suffered, and of the cruel treatment of
their own alderman, Cooke. He then went on to
repeat the remarks of Dr. Shaw touching the illegitimacy
of the princes, and spoke of the dangers of<pb n="322" /><anchor id="Pg322" />
having a boy king on the throne, concluding by saying
that although it were doubtful if Gloucester would
accept the crown if asked, he would certainly be
greatly influenced by any request proceeding from
the "worshipful citizens of the metropolis of the
kingdom."<note place="foot"><p>The duke's speech, interesting as it is, as showing the importance
attached to gaining the favour of the City, cannot be regarded as historical.&mdash;Stubbs,
Const. Hist., iii, 224 note.</p></note> Buckingham's eloquence was lost on the
citizens, who were as little influenced by what their
new Recorder, Thomas Fitz-William, had to say on
the matter. At length the duke lost patience and
plainly told them that the matter lay entirely with
the lords and commons, and that the assent of the
citizens, however desirable in itself, was not a necessity.
By this time the back of the hall was packed
with Gloucester's partisans, so that when Buckingham
put the question pointedly to the assembly&mdash;would
they have the Protector assume the crown?&mdash;a
cry of assent arose from this quarter and was taken up
by a few lads and apprentices. This was enough; the
voice of the few was accepted as the voice of the
many, and the citizens were bidden to attend on the
morrow to petition Gloucester to accept the crown.</p>

<note place="margin">The deposition of Edward V, 26 June, 1483.</note>

<p>Accordingly, on the morrow, a deputation from
the city waited on the Duke of Gloucester at Baynard's
Castle and invited him to accept the crown.
After a considerable show of affected reluctance,
Richard assented, and, having assented, lost no time
in carrying out his pre-conceived purpose. The very
next day he hastened to Westminster and, seating
himself on the throne, declared himself king by inheritance
and election.</p>

<pb n="323" /><anchor id="Pg323" /><index index="toc" level1="CORONATION OF RICHARD III." />

<note place="margin">The coronation of Richard III, 6 July, 1433.</note>

<p>On the 6th July the last Angevin king that
reigned over England was crowned&mdash;crowned with
his wife Anne, widow of Prince Edward, killed at
Tewkesbury, but after the battle not in it, and of
whose blood Richard himself is thought to have been
guilty. The City accepted the position and made
the new king and queen a present of £1,000; two-thirds
for the king and the remainder for the queen.
The money was raised in the city by way of a
fifteenth; the poor were not to be called upon to contribute,
and the gift was not to form a precedent.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 27.</p></note>
The claim of the mayor and citizens to assist the
chief butler at the coronation banquet was made and
allowed,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 33b. The names of the citizens selected for that
honour are recorded.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 21b. The names also of those who
attended coronations in the same capacity down to the time of George
IV are, with one exception (the coronation of Charles I), entered in the
City's archives.&mdash;(See Report on Coronations, presented to Co. Co.,
18 Aug., 1831. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Printed</hi>.)</p></note> the king, sitting crowned in <hi rend="font-style: italic">le Whitehawle</hi>,
presented to the mayor and aldermen who were present
on that occasion a gold cup set with pearls and
precious stones, to be used by the commonalty at
public entertainments in the Guildhall.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 43.</p></note> Concerning
this cup there is the following curious entry made in
the City's Records, under date 13th July, 1486, when
Hugh Brice was mayor:&mdash;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 114b.</p></note></p>

<p rend="display">"Item it is aggreed this day by the Court that
where Hugh Brice Mair of this Citie, hathe in his
Kepyng a Cuppe of gold, garneised with perle and
precious stone of the gifte of Richard, late in dede
and not of right, Kyng of Englond, which gifte was
to thuse of the Cominaltie of the said Citee, that if
the saide Cuppe be stolen or taken away by thevys<pb n="324" /><anchor id="Pg324" />
oute of his possession, or elles by the casualtie of
Fire hereafter it shall hapne the same Cuppe to be
brent or lost, that the same Hugh Brice hereafter
shall not be hurt or impeched therfore."</p>

<p>This extract is interesting as showing that the
coronation cup presented to the mayor of the City
by way of <hi rend="font-style: italic">honorarium</hi> was, at this period at least,
looked upon as a gift made to the City's use, and
that the mayor could not claim it as his own perquisite,
as mayors had been in the habit of doing in
days gone by, and as they continued to do afterwards.
William Estfeld, who, as mayor, attended the coronation
of Henry VI (6 Nov., 1429), and received the
customary gold cup and ewer, appropriated the gift
to his own use, and, as we have already mentioned,
bequeathed them to his grandson.</p>

<note place="margin">Rebellion of the Duke of Buckingham, 1483.</note>

<note place="margin">His execution, 2 Nov.</note>

<p>Richard had scarcely been seated three months
on the throne before the Duke of Buckingham, who
had been rewarded for his late services by being
appointed lord high constable, was in open rebellion,
and Henry, Earl of Richmond, long an exile in France,
was meditating an invasion. Buckingham's conspiracy
proved a failure, and he paid for his rashness with his
head. The Earl of Richmond was detained in France
by stress of weather, and danger from that quarter
was averted at least for a time.</p>

<note place="margin">The king's reception in the city, Nov., 1483.</note>

<note place="margin">Bold speech of the Londoners.</note>

<p>On Richard's return to London after putting
down his enemies, he was welcomed by over 400
members of the various civic companies, who rode
out to meet him in gowns of murrey.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 39.</p></note> His policy
was one of conciliation, and he lent a ready ear to a<pb n="325" /><anchor id="Pg325" /><index index="toc" level1="BOLD SPEECH OF THE CITIZENS." />
Petition which the citizens presented to him setting
forth the wrongs which they had suffered: "We be
determined" said the citizens in forcible language,
"rather to adventure and to commit us to the peril
of our lives and jeopardy of death, than to live in
such thraldom and bondage as we have lived some
time heretofore, oppressed and injured by extortions
and new impositions against the laws of God and
man, and the liberty and laws of this realm wherein
every Englishman is inherited."<note place="foot"><p>Green, Hist. of the English People, ii, 63.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richard's Parliament, Jan., 1484.</note>

<p>Richard met this appeal by summoning parliament
to meet in January (1484), when various acts
were passed affecting the trade and commerce of the
city and the country, and among them one which
forbade aliens keeping any foreign apprentices or
workpeople to assist them in their occupation, and
otherwise imposed great restrictions upon the merchant
stranger.<note place="foot"><p>Stat. 1 Richard III, c. 9.</p></note> This statute was scarcely less welcome
to the citizens of London than that which
declared the practice of exacting money under the
guise of benevolences to be unconstitutional.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, c. 2.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Expected invasion of Henry of Richmond, 1484.</note>

<p>In the summer he was welcomed wherever he
went, yet he knew that danger threatened. Richmond
was preparing for an invasion and the nobles were not
to be trusted. The citizens, too, were aware of the
danger, and had in the early part of the year appointed
a joint committee of aldermen and commoners to survey
the city's ordnance, and to supply guns and gunpowder
in place of that which had recently been
destroyed by a fire.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 43b.</p></note> In August they had promised<pb n="326" /><anchor id="Pg326" />
Richard a loan of £2,400, each alderman contributing
£100;<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 56.</p></note> and in the following November the mayor
and aldermen rode out to Kennington to meet him
and escort him to the Wardrobe, near Blackfriars.<note place="foot"><p>Cotton MS. Vitellius A, xvi, fo. 140.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richard defeated and slain at Bosworth, 22 Aug., 1485.</note>

<p>Matters became more serious as time went on.
In June, 1485, the City advanced another sum of
£2,000 to assist Richard against the "rebels," who
were daily expected to land in England.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fos. 78b, 81. Richard issued a proclamation against
Henry "Tydder" on the 23 June, calling upon his subjects to defend
themselves against his proposed attack.&mdash;Paston Letters (Gairdner), iii,
316-320.</p></note> Extraordinary
precautions were taken to guard the city.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fos. 81b-83b.</p></note> At
last the blow fell. On the 7th August Henry landed
at Milford Haven, and on the 22nd the battle of
Bosworth was fought and Richard killed.</p>

<note place="margin">Henry VII escorted to the city.</note>

<p>From Bosworth field Henry set out for London.
He was met at Shoreditch by a deputation from the
City, accompanied by the Recorder, and was presented
with a gift of 1,000 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fos. 84, 85b, 86b; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> "Materials illustrative of the
reign of Henry VII" (Rolls Series, No. 60), i, 4-6.</p></note> The standards taken on
the field of battle were deposited with much pomp
and ceremony in St. Paul's Church, where a <hi rend="font-style: italic">Te Deum</hi>
was sung, and for a few days Henry took up his residence
in the bishop's palace in St. Paul's Churchyard.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 479.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The sweating sickness, Sept.-Oct., 1485.</note>

<p>A cloud soon overshadowed the rejoicings which
followed Henry's accession. An epidemic hitherto unknown
in England, although visitations of it followed
at intervals during this and the succeeding reign, made
its appearance in the city towards the close of September.
The "sweating sickness," as this deadly<pb n="327" /><anchor id="Pg327" />
pestilence was called, carried off two mayors and six
aldermen within the space of a week<note place="foot"><p>Hecker's "Epidemics of the Middle Ages," p. 168.</p></note>&mdash;so sudden and
fatal was its attack. Sir Thomas Hille, who was
mayor at the time of its first appearance, fell a victim
to it on the 23rd September, and was succeeded by
William Stocker, appointed on the following day.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 87b.</p></note>
Within four days Stocker himself was dead. There
remained little more than a month before the regular
day of election of a mayor (28 Oct.)<note place="foot"><p>The day for election of mayor varied; at one time it was the
Feast of the Translation of S. Edward (13 Oct.), at another the Feast of
SS. Simon and Jude (28 Oct.).</p></note> for the year
ensuing, and John Warde was called upon to take office
during the interval.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 88.</p></note> He appears to have entertained
but little affection for the city, and the civic authorities
had some difficulty in getting him to reside in London,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 78b.</p></note>
where his duties required his presence. When the
mayoralty year expired he was not put in nomination
for re-election. He probably went back into
the country, glad to get away from the pestilential
city, and Hugh Brice was elected in his stead.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 89b.</p></note>
Fortunately for the city, the epidemic departed as
suddenly and unexpectedly as it came. By the end
of October it had entirely disappeared, and allowed
of Henry's coronation taking place on the 30th of
that month.</p>

<note place="margin">A City loan of £2,000.</note>

<p>Within a fortnight of his arrival in London
Henry issued a writ of summons for his first parliament.
It was not so much for the purpose of obtaining
supplies that he was anxious that parliament should
meet at the earliest opportunity; he was desirous of<pb n="328" /><anchor id="Pg328" />
obtaining as soon as possible a parliamentary title to
the crown. As for his immediate necessities, he preferred
to apply to the City. He asked for a loan of
6,000 marks, or £4,000; but the citizens would not
advance more than half that sum. The loan was repaid
the following year&mdash;"every penie to the good
contentation and satisfying of them that disbursed it."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 482, 483; Cotton MS. Vitellius A, xvi, fo. 141b.
According to Fabyan (p. 683), the Mercers, Grocers and Drapers
subscribed nearly one half of the loan.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's marriage with Elizabeth of York, Jan., 1486.</note>

<p>In January, 1486, Henry married the Princess
Elizabeth, daughter of Edward IV, and heiress of the
Yorkist family. He had previously taken the precaution
of committing to the Tower the Earl of
Warwick, son of Clarence, for fear lest he might set
up a title to the crown.<note place="foot"><p>Pol. Verg., 717; "Materials illustrative of the reign of Henry
VII" (Rolls Series, No. 60), i, 3.</p></note> After his marriage he set
out on a progress through the country, and on his
return to London, in June, was met by the mayor and
citizens at Putney, and escorted by them down the
river to Westminster.<note place="foot"><p>Gairdner's "Henry the Seventh" (Twelve English Statesmen
Series), p. 47. No record of this appears in the City's archives.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The insurrection of Lambert Simnel, 1487.</note>

<note place="margin">City gifts to the king, June and July, 1487.</note>

<p>A rumour that the Earl of Warwick had escaped
from the Tower gave an opportunity for an imposter,
Lambert Simnel, to personate the earl. In order to
satisfy the Londoners that the rumour of Warwick's
escape was a fabrication, Henry caused his prisoner to be
paraded through the streets of the city, and exposed to
public view at St. Paul's. After Simnel's defeat (16 June,
1487), the Common Council agreed (28 June) to send
a deputation, consisting of two aldermen, the recorder,
and four commoners, with a suite of 24 men, to meet<pb n="329" /><anchor id="Pg329" /><index index="toc" level1="VISIT OF HENRY VII TO THE CITY." />
the king at Kenilworth, and at the same time voted
the king a present of £1000.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fos. 150b, 151.</p></note> This gift was quickly
followed (11 July) by the grant of another loan of
£2,000 to be levied on the civic companies as before.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 151.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king escorted to London, Oct., 1487.</note>

<note place="margin">The City's gift to the queen at her coronation, 25 Nov., 1487.</note>

<p>In October Henry was expected in London,<note place="foot"><p>He arrived on the 3rd Nov.&mdash;Gairdner, p. 57.</p></note> and
the Common Council again showed their loyalty by
agreeing that the mayor and aldermen should ride
forth to meet his highness, clad in cloaks of scarlet,
and accompanied by a suite of servants clothed in
medley, at the cost of the "Chamber." With them
also rode a contingent from the various civic guilds,
clothed in violet, and numbering over 400 horsemen.
The Mercers, the Grocers, the Drapers, the Fishmongers,
and the "Taillours," each sent 30 mounted
representatives of their guild; the Goldsmiths sent 24,
whilst the rest sent contingents varying from one to
twenty.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fos. 157b, 158.</p></note> On the occasion of the queen's coronation,
which took place the following month (25 Nov.), she
was made the recipient of a gift of 1,000 marks by
the City.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 161.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry VII and Brittany, 1488-1492.</note>

<p>The king would willingly have remained at peace
if he were allowed, from motives of economy if for no
other reason. England, however, could not sit still
and see Brittany overwhelmed by the French king.
Before assistance could be sent to the Duchess Anne,
it was imperative that money should be raised. At
the close of 1488 the Common Council voted the king
a loan of £4,000. The money was ordered to be
raised by assessment on the companies, but the practice
was not to be drawn into precedent. The king,<pb n="330" /><anchor id="Pg330" />
like a good paymaster as he always was, whatever
other defects he may have had, repaid the money in
the following year.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 223b; Cotton MS. Vitellius A, xvi, fo. 142b;
Fabyan, p. 683; Holinshed, iii, 492.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Parliamentary supplies and City loans.</note>

<p>Early in the following year parliament<note place="foot"><p>Henry's second parliament was summoned to meet the 9th Nov.,
1487. The names of the City's representatives have not come down to
us, but we know that William White, an alderman, was elected one or
the members in the place of Thomas Fitz-William, who was chosen
member for Lincolnshire, and we have the names of six men chosen to
superintend the City's affairs in this parliament (<hi rend="font-style: italic">ad prosequendum in
parliamento pro negociis civitatis</hi>), viz:&mdash;William Capell, alderman,
Thomas Bullesdon, Nicholas Alwyn, Simon Harrys, William Brogreve,
and Thomas Grafton.&mdash;Journal 9, fo. 224.</p></note> granted
large supplies which enabled Henry to despatch 6,000
Englishmen to Anne's assistance, but which caused
much discontent among the "rude and beastlie"
people of Yorkshire and Durham.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 492.</p></note> In June, 1491,
another loan of £3,000 was raised, this time by assessment
on the wards;<note place="foot"><p>Journal 9, fo. 273b.</p></note> and in October Henry declared
to parliament his intention of invading France in
person. A grant of two fifteenths and two tenths was
immediately made to assist him in his expedition by
parliament; whilst the City contributed a "great benevolence,"
the fellowship of Drapers contributing
more than any other fellowship, and every alderman
subscribing, whether he wished it or no, the sum of
£200. The amount contributed by the commonalty
exceeded £9,000.<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan, p. 684.</p></note> Thus furnished with supplies, the
king crossed over to Calais on the 6th October, 1492.
The campaign, however, had scarcely opened before
Henry gladly accepted the liberal terms offered him
by the French king, and peace was signed at Etaples
(3 Nov.).</p>

<pb n="331" /><anchor id="Pg331" /><index index="toc" level1="THE PERKIN WARBECK CONSPIRACY." />

<note place="margin">Perkin Warbeck conspiracy, 1496-1497.</note>

<p>The success which, brief as it was, had attended
Simnel's enterprise was sufficient to encourage a hope
that a better planned project might end in overturning
the throne. A report was accordingly blazed abroad
that Richard, Duke of York, brother of King Edward V,
was yet alive, not having been murdered in the Tower,
as had been supposed; and a man called Perkin Warbeck
or Warboys, a native of Tournay, assumed the
name of Richard Plantagenet and succeeded in getting
a large number of people in Ireland and Scotland to
believe that in his person they in fact saw Richard,
Duke of York, the rightful heir to the crown.
James IV of Scotland not only gave him in marriage
the lady Catherine Gordon, daughter of the Earl of
Huntley, but led an army into England in hopes that
the appearance of the pretended prince might raise
an insurrection in the northern counties. Instead,
however, of joining the invaders the English prepared
to repel them, and James retreated into his own
country. This took place in 1496. Parliament granted
large supplies to enable the king to meet the danger,
but the inhabitants of Cornwall, sick of the constant
demands made of them for money, and aware of the
large treasure which Henry had already amassed,
openly resisted any attempt at further taxation and
determined to march on London.</p>

<note place="margin">The city put into a state of defence.</note>

<p>The Londoners, who not only abstained from
opposing the new demand for money, but volunteered
a loan to the king (15 Nov.) of £4,000,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 10, fos. 80b, 83; Repertory 1, fos. 10b, 13. The
"Repertories"&mdash;containing minutes of the proceedings of the Court of
Aldermen, distinct from those of the Common Council&mdash;commence in
1495.</p></note> lost no time
in putting their city into a state of defence. Six<pb n="332" /><anchor id="Pg332" />
aldermen and a number of representatives from the
livery companies were deputed to attend to the city's
ordnance.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fo. 19b.</p></note> The mayor was to be allowed twelve
armed men in addition to his usual suite, and the
sheriffs forty sergeants and forty valets in order to
assist them in keeping the peace within the city.
Communication was to be kept up at least once in
the day between the mayor and the Lord Chancellor.
Houses which had been set up on the city's walls, or
within sixteen feet of them, were to be abated. John
Stokker, who filled the not unworthy office of Common
Hunt,<note place="foot"><p>Two years later, when the post was held by Arnold Babyngton,
complaint being made of the noisome smell arising from the burning of
bones, horns, shavings of leather, &amp;c., in preparing food for the City's
hounds, near Moorgate, the Common Hunt was allowed a sum of 26<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>
in addition to his customary fees for the purpose of supplying wood for
the purpose.&mdash;Repertory 1, fo. 70. The office was maintained as late as
the year 1807, when it was abolished by order of the Common Council.&mdash;Journal
84, fo. 135b.</p></note> was ordered daily to ride out to learn the
king's pleasure and report thereon to the mayor and
aldermen. Among those appointed to guard the city's
gates and Temple Bar was Alderman Fabyan, the
chronicler.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fo. 20b.</p></note> The state of anxiety which prevailed in
the city at this crisis is illustrated by "Jesus Mercy"
at the head of one side of the page of the City's record,
on which the above orders are entered, whilst on the
other side are the words <hi rend="font-style: italic">vigilie temporis turbacionis</hi>.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 20, 20b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The rebels defeated at Blackheath, 22 June, 1497.</note>

<note place="margin">Perkin Warbeck in Cornwall.</note>

<note place="margin">Surrenders to the king's forces and is brought prisoner to London, Oct., 1498.</note>

<note place="margin">Is executed at Tyburn, 1499.</note>

<p>By the 22nd June, 1497, all immediate danger had
passed, the rebels being on that day utterly defeated
at Blackheath. Their leaders were taken and executed;
the rest were for the most part made prisoners, but were
soon afterwards dismissed without further punishment.
The leniency displayed towards them by Henry was<pb n="333" /><anchor id="Pg333" /><index index="toc" level1="DEFEAT AND CAPTURE OF WARBECK." />
ill-repaid by their afterwards flocking to the standard
of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">soi-disant</hi> Richard IV, King of England, who
availed himself of their mutinous disposition and
appeared in their midst at Bodmin. The news of
Perkin Warbeck having arrived in Cornwall from
Ireland was brought to the mayor and aldermen of
the City of London by letter from the king, which was
read to the Common Council on Saturday, the 16th
September.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 10, fo. 104b.</p></note> The rebels made an unsuccesful attempt
to get possession of Exeter, but hearing of the approach
of the king's forces, Perkin Warbeck withdrew to
Taunton, leaving his followers to take care of themselves.
From Taunton he went to "Mynet" (Minehead)
accompanied by less than sixty adherents,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 105.</p></note> and
by the 12th October the king was able to inform
the Mayor that Peter "Warboys" had voluntarily
submitted himself and had confessed to his being
a native of Tournay.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 108.</p></note> The king had him conveyed
to London and paraded through the streets
on horseback, in a species of mock triumph, and
caused his confession to be printed and scattered over
the country that people might see the real character
of the man. For a time he appears to have been
detained in lax custody about the court, but after he
had made an attempt to escape and reach the sea-coast,
and been re-captured, he was sent to the Tower.
There he got into communication with the unfortunate
Earl of Warwick, and entered into a plot for effecting
his own and the earl's liberty. A charge was formulated
against the earl on the most trivial grounds, of a
conspiracy to seize the Tower, and Warbeck was
indicted as an accomplice. The former, being found<pb n="334" /><anchor id="Pg334" />
guilty by his peers, was beheaded on Tower Hill,
while Perkin and three of his accomplices were hanged
at Tyburn.<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan, p. 687.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Visit of Henry VIII as a boy to the city, 30 Oct., 1498.</note>

<p>In the meantime Prince Henry, who afterwards
succeeded his father on the throne as King Henry VIII,
but was at the time a child of seven years, paid a visit
to the city (30 Oct., 1498), where he received a hearty
welcome and was presented by the Recorder, on behalf
of the citizens, with a pair of gilt goblets. In reply to
the Recorder, who in presenting this "litell and powre"
gift, promised to remember his grace with a better at
some future time, the prince made the following short
speech:&mdash;<note place="foot"><p>Cotton MS. Vitellius A, xvi, fo. 176.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">His speech.</note>

<p rend="display"><hi rend="font-style: italic">"Fader Maire, I thank you and your Brethern
here present of this greate and kynd remembraunce
which I trist in tyme comyng to deserve. And for asmoche
as I can not give unto you according thankes,
I shall pray the Kynges Grace to thank you, and for
my partye I shall not forget yo<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> kyndnesse."</hi></p>

<p>In anticipation of the prince's visit, a proclamation
had been made by the civic authorities with the view
of purging the city of infectious disease, to the
effect that all vagabonds and others affected with the
"greate pockes" should vacate the city on pain of
imprisonment.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fo. 41b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Negotiations for a marriage between Prince Arthur and Catherine of Aragon.</note>

<note place="margin">Preparations for reception of the princess, Nov., 1499.</note>

<p>The removal of Warwick&mdash;"the one judicial
murder of Henry's reign"&mdash;if not suggested by Spain,
was an act which could not be otherwise than grateful
to the Spanish king. For five years past negotiations<pb n="335" /><anchor id="Pg335" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MARRIAGE OF PRINCE ARTHUR." />
had been proceeding for a marriage between Prince
Arthur and Catherine of Aragon. Warwick's death
cleared away the last of Henry's serious competitors,
and "not a doubtful drop of royal blood" remained
in the kingdom to oppose Arthur's claim to the
succession. The princess was expected shortly to
arrive in England, and a committee composed of
aldermen and commoners was appointed (Nov. 1499)
to consult with the king's commissioners as to the
preparations to be made for her reception.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fo. 62.</p></note> Nearly
two years, however, elapsed before she set foot in
England. In May, 1500, there were again rumours
of her approach, and the Common Council voted a
sum of money to be levied on the wards to defray
the expenses of her reception.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 10, fo. 187b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Death of an infant prince, June, 1500.</note>

<p>The "garnysshyng of the pagents" for the festive
occasion<note place="foot"><p>Journal 10, fo. 190b.</p></note> was interrupted by the death of Edmund,
the king's infant son. On the 19th June the members
of the various craft guilds were ordered to line the
streets of Old Bailey and Fleet Street, through which
the funeral procession was to pass on its way to
Westminster. The mayor and aldermen were to
stand, clad in their violet gowns, near Saint Dunstan's
Church, and the next morning to go to Westminster
by barge to attend the solemn requiem.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 191.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The marriage of Prince Arthur with Catherine of Aragon, 14 Nov., 1501.</note>

<p>There was no necessity for hurry in regard to
the pageants. More than a twelvemonth was yet to
elapse before they were wanted. At length&mdash;on the
2nd October,<note place="foot"><p>This is the date given by Gairdner (p. 198).  According to
Fabyan (p. 687) she arrived on the 4th Oct.</p></note> 1501&mdash;the princess landed at Plymouth,<pb n="336" /><anchor id="Pg336" />
and five days later the City received notice from the
king of her approach to London. The marriage was
solemnized at St. Paul's on the 14th November, the
princess being presented with silver flagons by the
City in honour of the occasion.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 10, fos. 238, 238b.</p></note> Five months later
(2 April, 1502) the bride was a widow, Prince Arthur
having died at the early age of fifteen.</p>

<note place="margin">More rejoicings in the city, March, 1503</note>

<p>In 1503 the streets of the city were again put
into mourning, for in February of that year Henry
lost his queen. A long account of the manner of
"receyvyng of the corps of the most noble princes
Quene Elizabeth" is given in the City's Archives.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fos. 122b-126. The account will be found in Archæol.,
vol. xxxii, p. 126.</p></note>
In the following month the streets presented a
very different appearance, the occasion being the
solemnization of the league made between Henry and
the King of the Romans. Bonfires were ordered to be
lighted at nine different places, and at each of them
was to be placed a hogshead of wine, with two
sergeants and two sheriffs' yeomen to prevent disturbance;
but seeing that it was the Lenten season
and that the queen had so recently died, there was to
be no minstrelsy. The City Chamberlain was instructed
to provide a certain quantity of "Ipocras,"
claret, Rhenish wine and Muscatel, besides comfits
and wafers, and two pots of "Succade" and green
ginger, to be presented on the City's behalf to the
ambassadors of the King of the Romans, lying at
"Pasmer Howse"; a similar gift being presented the
following day on behalf of the sheriffs.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fos. 130, 130b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="337" /><anchor id="Pg337" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY'S CONTROL OVER THE COMPANIES." />

<note place="margin">Charter of Henry VII to the Tailors of London, 6 June 1503.</note>

<p>Henry's chief merit was that he established order,
and for this the citizens were grateful. This improvement
on the weak government of his immediate predecessors
had only been carried out, however, at the
cost of extension of royal power, and the City was
made to suffer with the rest of the kingdom. In
1503 the civic authorities were deprived by statute
of their control over the livery companies,<note place="foot"><p>By Stat. 19 Henry VII, c. 7, annulling Stat. 15 Henry VI, c. 6.</p></note> and in the
same year the Tailors of London obtained a charter
which gave umbrage to the mayor and aldermen of
the City, as ousting them of their jurisdiction. The
Tailors maintained their independence, and their wardens
are expressly mentioned as refusing to join the
Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths
and other fraternities in a petition to parliament
(1512) for placing them formally under the rule of
the mayor and aldermen, from which they were frequently
breaking away.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fo. 146.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's charter to the City, 23 July, 1505.</note>

<p>It was not until 1505 that the City succeeded in
getting its charter<note place="foot"><p>Charter dated 23 July, 1505, preserved at the Guildhall (Box
No. 15).</p></note> from Henry, and then only on
payment of the sum of 5,000 marks. The terms of
the charter, moreover, were far from satisfactory, and
an attempt was made to get them altered and obtain
an abatement of the fine,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 1, fo. 175.</p></note> but to no purpose.</p>

<note place="margin">Henry's high-handed policy towards the City, 1506-1509.</note>

<p>Henry continued his high-handed policy towards
the City up to the day of his death, and thereby
greatly increased his treasure. His chief instruments
were Empson and Dudley, who took up their residence
in the city, occupying two houses in Walbrook,<pb n="338" /><anchor id="Pg338" />
whence each had a door into a garden of the Earl of
Oxford's house in St. Swithin's Lane.<note place="foot"><p>Strype, Stow's "Survey" (1720), bk. ii, p. 193.</p></note> There they
used to meet and concert measures for filling the
king's purse and their own. In 1506 Henry removed
Robert Johnson, a goldsmith, from the shrievalty
within three days of his election, and put William
Fitz-William in his place. Johnson took the matter
so much to heart that he died.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fos. 12, 14; Grey Friars Chron. (Camd. Soc., No.
53), p. 29.</p></note> In the same year
Thomas Kneseworth, the late mayor, was committed
to the Marshalsea, together with the sheriffs who had
served under him, and only regained his liberty on
payment of a large sum of money.<note place="foot"><p>The sum mentioned by Holinshed (iii. 539), is £1,400; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Fabyan,
p. 689.</p></note> In 1507 Sir
William Capel, Alderman of Walbrook Ward, who
had already fallen a victim to Empson and been
heavily fined under an obsolete statute, was again
attacked and fined £2,000 for supposed negligence
during his mayoralty. Rather than submit to such
extortion he went to prison, and remained there
until the king's death, when he obtained his freedom
and was soon afterwards re-elected mayor.<note place="foot"><p>Baker, in his Chronicle (ed. 1674), p. 248, puts Capel's fine at
£1,400; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Fabyan, p. 689; Holinshed, iii, 530; Journal 11, fo. 94.</p></note>
Lawrence Aylmer, another mayor, was also a victim
of Henry's tyranny, and was committed to the
compter, where he remained for the rest of the
reign.<note place="foot"><p>Fabyan, p. 690.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Marriage of the Princess Mary, Dec., 1508.</note>

<p>In the meantime the Archduke Philip happened
to fall into Henry's hands (Jan., 1506). Whilst
crossing the sea to claim the kingdom of Castile<pb n="339" /><anchor id="Pg339" /><index index="toc" level1="MARRIAGE OF THE PRINCESS MARY." />
in right of his wife, he was driven by stress of
weather into Weymouth. Henry was too shrewd a
politician not to make the most of so lucky an event,
and detained him in a species of honourable captivity,
until Philip had promised him the hand of his sister
Margaret with a large dower. This marriage alliance
was destined never to be realised. Another scheme,
however, was subsequently proposed and met with
more success. This was a marriage of Henry's own
daughter with Philip's son Charles, Prince of Castile.
News of their engagement was conveyed to the
mayor and aldermen of the City by a letter from the
king himself (25 Dec., 1507), in which he expatiated
on the benefits, political and commercial, likely to
arise from the match.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book M, fo. 138; Journal 11, fo. 28.</p></note></p>

<p>This letter was followed by another from the king,
dated from Greenwich, the 23rd June following, in
which the Corporation was informed that for the assurance
of execution of the marriage treaty both parties
had given pledges, and that the City of London was,
among other cities and towns, included in letters
obligatory to that effect, which letters he begged
should be sealed without delay with the Common Seal
of the City.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fos. 37-39.</p></note> And so, after the manner of the times,
the boy of eight was married (by proxy) to the girl of
twelve, amid great rejoicings in London (17 Dec., 1508).<note place="foot"><p>Gairdner's "Henry the Seventh," p. 206.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's taste for the fine arts.</note>

<p>If Henry amassed wealth, it was not from any
miserly motive. He well knew the value of the
money, and that peace at home was never better
secured than by a full treasury. He made, moreover,
a princely use of his money, encouraging scholarship,<pb n="340" /><anchor id="Pg340" />
music, and architecture, and dazzled the eyes of foreign
ambassadors with the splendour of his receptions. That
he had a fine taste in building no one can deny who has
once seen the chapel of King's College, Cambridge, or
the chapel that bears his name at Westminster.</p>

<note place="margin">The King's Chapel and Chantry at Westminster.</note>

<p>Originally intended by Henry as a resting place
for the remains of his uncle, Henry VI, the last mentioned
edifice was diverted from its purposes and became
the chantry as well as the tomb of Henry VII
himself. Anxiety for his soul caused him to bind the
Abbot of Westminster by heavy penalties to the due
observance of his obit. These penalties were set out
in six books or deeds, sealed with the Common Seal of
the City of London, and formally delivered to the king
by a deputation of the mayor and aldermen, who received
in return a seventh book to remain in their
custody. In 1504&mdash;the year that Pope Julius sanctioned
the removal of the remains of Henry VI from
Windsor to Westminster&mdash;the mayor and citizens
formally sealed the "books" before the Master of the
Rolls at the Guildhall. Two years later certain livery
companies undertook to keep the king's obit on the
day that the mayor for the time being went to take
his oath at the Exchequer.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 10, fos. 318, 318b; Repertory 2, fos. 10b-11b. A list of
"such places as have charged themself and promysed to kepe the yerely
obit" of Henry VII, as well as a copy of indentures made for the
assurance of the same obit, with schedule of sums paid to various
religious houses for the observance of the same, are entered in the City's
Records.&mdash;Repertory 1. fo. 167b; Letter Book P, fo. 186b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's death, 22 April, 1509.</note>

<p>The king died at his palace of Shene, recently renamed
in his honour "Richmond," on the 22nd April,<note place="foot"><p>The generally accepted day of his death, although the City's
Archives in one place record it as having taken place on the 21st.&mdash;Journal
2, fo. 67b; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Fabyan, 690.</p></note><pb n="341" /><anchor id="Pg341" /><index index="toc" level1="LAST DAYS OF HENRY VII." />
1509. Just before his death he granted a general
pardon and paid the debts of prisoners committed to
the compters of London and to Ludgate for debts
amounting to forty shillings or less.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 541.</p></note> His corpse was
conveyed from Richmond to St. Paul's on the 9th
May, being met on its way at St. George's Bar, in
Southwark, by the mayor, aldermen and a suite of
104 commoners, all in black clothing and all on horseback.
The streets were lined with other members of
the companies bearing torches, the lowest craft occupying
the first place. Next after the freemen of the
city came the "strangers"&mdash;Easterlings, Frenchmen,
Spaniards, Venetians, Genoese, Florentines and
"Lukeners"&mdash;on horseback and on foot, also bearing
torches.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fos. 67b-69.</p></note> These took up their position in Gracechurch
Street. Cornhill was occupied by the lower crafts,
ordered in such a way that "the most worshipful
crafts" stood next unto "Paules." A similar order
was preserved the next day, when the corpse was
removed from Saint Paul's to Westminster. The
lowest crafts were placed nearest to the Cathedral,
and the most worshipful next to Temple Bar, where
the civic escort terminated. The mayor and aldermen
proceeded to Westminster by water, to attend the
"masse and offering." The mayor, with his mace in
his hand, made his offering next after the Lord
Chamberlain; those aldermen who had passed the
chair<note place="foot"><p>"Aldermen barons and presenting barons astate whiche hath been
Maires."</p></note> offered next after the Knights of the Garter,
and before all "knights for the body"; whilst the
aldermen who had not yet served as mayor made
their offering after the knights.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 2, fo. 69.</p></note></p>

<pb n="342" /><anchor id="Pg342" />

<p>When King Henry VIII was about to make an
expedition to France in 1544, the Court of Aldermen
gave notice to the Bishop of London that the obit
of Henry VII would be kept on Friday, the 16th May,
on which day there would be a general procession,
and that the observance would be continued until the
king departed out of the realm, and then on every
Friday and Wednesday until his return.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 68b.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="343" /><anchor id="Pg343" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XIII.</head>

<p></p>
<div>
<index index="toc" level1="PROCEEDINGS AGAINST EMPSON AND DUDLEY." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">Proceeding against Empson and Dudley and their agents.</note>

<p>One of the first acts of the new king was to
grant Letters Patent absolving the City of all trespasses
committed before the date of his accession,<note place="foot"><p>Letters Patent, dated 9 June, 1509, preserved at the Guildhall
(Box No. 29).</p></note>
and to offer restitution to all who had suffered at the
hands of Empson and Dudley or their agents. Empson
and Dudley were themselves committed to the
Tower and afterwards executed. In the meantime
an enquiry was opened in the city as to recent proceedings
against Capel and others.</p>

<p>It was found that six men, whose names were
John Derby, <hi rend="font-style: italic">alias</hi> Wright, a bowyer, Richard Smyth,
a carpenter, William Sympson, a fuller, Henry Stokton,
a fishmonger, Thomas Yong, a saddler, and
Robert Jakes, a shearman&mdash;all of whom had more
than once been convicted of perjury, and on that
account been struck off inquests&mdash;had contrived to get
themselves replaced on the panel, and had been the
chief movers in the recent actions against the late
mayor and other officers of the city. They had,
moreover, taken bribes for concealment of offences of
forestalling and regrating. Being found guilty, on
their own confession, of having brought false charges
against many of the aldermen, the Court of Common
Council adjudged the whole of the accused to be
disfranchised. Three of them, who were found more<pb n="344" /><anchor id="Pg344" />
guilty than the rest, were sentenced to be taken from
prison on the next market day, on horseback, without
saddles, and with their faces turned towards the horses'
tails, to the pillory on Cornhill. There they were to
be set "their heddes in the holys" until proclamation
of their crime and sentence was read. The lesser
offenders were spared the pillory, but were condemned
to attend on horseback at Cornhill, whence all the
offenders were conducted to the Standard in Fleet
Street "by the most high ways," where the proclamation
was again read. The culprits were then taken
back to prison and made to abjure the city on pain of
imprisonment at the pleasure of the mayor and
aldermen.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book M, fo. 159; Journal 11, fo. 74b.</p></note> Among the charges brought against
Derby was one to the effect that being on a jury he
had received the sum of ten shillings and "a quarter
of ffisshe for his howsehold," a bribe which a suitor
had tendered by the advice and counsel of Thomas
Yong, saddler, who was apparently acting as Derby's
accomplice.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fo. 68.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">City gift on occasion of the king's coronation, 24 June, 1509.</note>

<p>On the occasion of the king's coronation, which
took place on Midsummer-day soon after his marriage
with Catherine of Aragon, his brother's widow, the
citizens presented the king and queen with the sum
of £1,000 or 1,500 marks. Two-thirds of the gift
was given expressly to the king, the remaining one-third
being a tribute of respect to the queen. The
money was to be raised in the city by way of a
fifteenth, but the poor were not to be assessed.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fos. 80, 81b, 82; Letter Book M, fo. 160.</p></note> The
procession from the Tower to Westminster was equal<pb n="345" /><anchor id="Pg345" /><index index="toc" level1="CORONATION OF HENRY VIII." />
to, if it did not surpass, any spectacle that had yet
been witnessed in the city for its gorgeousness and
pomp. The streets were railed and barred from
Gracechurch Street to Cheapside at the expense of
the livery companies who lined the way,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fo. 80.</p></note>  "beginning
with base and meane occupations and so
ascending to the worshipful crafts." The Goldsmiths
of London were especially conspicuous for their marks
of loyalty on that day. Their stalls, which were
situate by the Old Change at the west end of Chepe,
were occupied by fair maidens dressed in white and
holding tapers of white wax, whilst priests in their
robes stood by with censers of silver and incensed the
king and queen as they passed.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 547.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The war with France, 1512-1513.</note>

<p>After three years of indolent and luxurious ease
Henry became embroiled in continental troubles. In
1511 a holy league had been formed for the purpose
of driving the French out of the Milanese, and
Henry's co-operation was desired. A parliament was
summoned to meet early in the following year.<note place="foot"><p>According to Holinshed (iii, 567), Parliament opened on the
25th Jan., 1512. The Parliamentary Returns give the date as the
4th Feb. with "no returns found." The names of the City's members,
however, are recorded in the City's Archives. They were Alderman Sir
William Capell, who had suffered so much at the close of the last reign,
Richard Broke, the City's new Recorder, William Cawle or Calley,
draper, and John Kyme, mercer, commoners.&mdash;Journal 11, fo. 147b;
Repertory 2, fo. 125b.</p></note>
After granting supplies<note place="foot"><p>The Act for levying the necessary subsidy ordained that every
alien made a denizen should be rated like a native, but that aliens who
had not become denizens should be assessed at double the amount at
which natives were assessed.&mdash;See "Historical Introd. to Cal. of
Denizations and Naturalizations of Aliens in England, 1509-1603."
(Huguenot Soc.), viii, 7.</p></note> it unanimously agreed that
war should be proclaimed against France. The campaign
of 1512 ended ingloriously, and the French<pb n="346" /><anchor id="Pg346" />
king threatened to turn the tables on Henry and to
invade England. Henry rose to the occasion and at
once set about strengthening his navy. On the
30th January, 1513, he addressed a letter to the Corporation
of London desiring them to furnish him
with 300 men, the same to be at Greenwich by the
15th February at the latest.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fo. 1.</p></note> Proclamation was
thereupon made in the city for all persons who were
prepared to join the war to appear at the Guildhall
any time before the 10th February, where, if approved,
they would be furnished with sufficient harness and
weapons, without any charge, and also with sufficient
wages at the king's cost.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 1b.</p></note></p>

<p>The city was suffering at the time from great
scarcity of wheat, and each alderman was called upon
to contribute the sum of £5 towards alleviating the
distress which prevailed. A contract was made with
certain Hanse merchants to furnish the city with 2,000
quarters of wheat and rye respectively by Midsummer-day,
whilst the royal purveyors were forbidden to
lay hands on wheat, malt or grain entering the port
of London.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fo. 171; Repertory 2, fos. 150b, 172.</p></note> Under the circumstances it could have
been no great hardship, but rather an advantage to rid
the city of 300 mouths. On the 1st February, 1513,
the aldermen were instructed to enquire in their
respective wards as to the number of men each ward
could furnish, and two days later the livery companies
were ordered to find the sum of £300 to defray the
expense connected with fitting out the men. If more
than £300 were needed they were to draw on the
Chamber, but any money not expended out of that<pb n="347" /><anchor id="Pg347" /><index index="toc" level1="SOLDIERS FURNISHED BY THE CITY." />
sum was to be paid into the Chamber.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fos. 151b-152.</p></note> The companies
raised the sum of £405, the Mercers contributing
£35, the Grocers, Drapers, Fishmongers and Goldsmiths
respectively £30, and the rest sums of smaller
amount.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fo. 2.</p></note> There was some difference of opinion as to
the nature of the uniform to be worn by the city's
contingent. At length it was settled that the soldiers'
coats should be white, with a St. George's cross and
sword, together with a rose, at the back and the same
before. Their shoes were to be left to the discretion
of the muster-masters.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fo. 153.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Battle of Spurs, 16 Aug., 1513.</note>

<p>Henry himself now crossed over to France. The
campaign proved more successful than the last, for
the French being attacked at Guinegate, were seized
with so great a panic that Henry achieved a bloodless
victory. From the hasty flight of the French cavalry,
the engagement came to be known as the Battle of
Spurs. This victory secured the fall of Terouenne
and was followed shortly afterwards by the capture
of Tournay.</p>

<note place="margin">Peace with France, 1514.</note>

<p>Notwithstanding these successes, however, Henry
found it necessary to make peace in the following
year. His allies had got what they wanted, and the
conquest of France was as far off as ever. It
remained only to make as good a bargain as he could.
The French king consented to the payment of a large
sum of money, in return for which he was given
Henry's sister Mary in marriage, although she was
already affianced, if not married, to Prince Charles
of Castile. This was the work of the king's new
minister, Wolsey.</p>

<pb n="348" /><anchor id="Pg348" />

<note place="margin">The New Learning.</note>

<p>To the apostles of the New Learning&mdash;as the
revival of letters which commenced in the last reign
came to be called&mdash;to Erasmus, to Archbishop
Warham, to More and to Colet, the war at its outset
had been eminently distasteful. With the accession
of Henry VIII to the throne they had hoped for
better things. War was to be for ever banished and
a "new order" was to prevail.</p>

<note place="margin">Thomas More.</note>

<p>Of its connection with More and Colet the City
is justly proud. At the opening of Henry's reign the
future lord chancellor was executing the duties of the
comparatively unimportant post of under-sheriff or
judge of the Poultry Compter, a post which he continued
to hold until 1517.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book M., fo. 257; Repertory 3, fo. 221. In July, 1517,
the Fellowship of Saddlers of London consented, on the recommendation
of Archbishop Warham, to refer a matter of dispute between it
and the parishioners of St. Vedast to the Recorder and Thomas More,
gentleman, for settlement (Repertory 3, fo. 149); and in Aug., 1521,
"Thomas More, late of London, gentleman," was bound over, in the
sum of £20, to appear before the mayor for the time being, to answer
such charges as might be made against him.&mdash;Journal 12, fo. 123.</p></note> He had received his
education in the city at St. Antony's School in Threadneedle
Street, a school which had already achieved a
great reputation and afterwards reckoned among its
pupils the famous Whitgift. Later in life he shut
himself up for four years in the Charterhouse of
London, living a life of devotion and prayer, but
without taking any vow.<note place="foot"><p>Roper's Life of Sir Thomas More, pp. 3, 5, 6.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Dean Colet.</note>

<p>The father of John Colet, Dean of St. Paul's, had
taken an active part in municipal life. Henry Colet
had been alderman first of Farringdon Ward Without
and afterwards of the Wards of Castle Baynard and
Cornhill,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 8, fo. 144; Journal 9, fos. 13, 142b.</p></note> and as alderman of the last mentioned ward<pb n="349" /><anchor id="Pg349" /><index index="toc" level1="EDUCATION IN THE CITY." />
he had died towards the close of 1505. He had
served as sheriff in 1477 and as mayor in 1486.</p>

<note place="margin">Education in the city.</note>

<p>Up to the time of Henry VI education had been
carried on in the city chiefly by means of schools
attached to the various city churches and religious
houses. By order of Henry VI, and at the instigation
of four city ministers,<note place="foot"><p>William Lichfield, rector of All Hallows the Great, Gilbert
Worthington, rector of St. Andrew's, Holborn, John Cote, rector of St.
Peter's, Cornhill, and John Nigel or Neel, master of the hospital of St.
Thomas de Acon and parson of St. Mary Colechurch.&mdash;Rot. Parl. v, 137.</p></note> grammar schools were established
in several parishes. The school of St. Antony
attached to the hospital of the same name, of which
Dr. John Carpenter was at the time master, received
an endowment from Henry VI for the maintenance of
scholars at Oxford. The school continued to flourish
some time after the dissolution of the hospital. There
was also a school attached to the hospital of St.
Thomas of Acon, as famous in its day as that of
St. Antony, but of which little is known until after the
suppression of the religious houses by Henry VIII,
when it passed into the hands of the Mercers' Company
and became known, as it is to this day, as the Mercers'
School.</p>

<note place="margin">The City of London School.</note>

<p>The Dr. John Carpenter just mentioned must not
be confounded with the Town Clerk of that name,
the compiler of the famous <hi rend="font-style: italic">Liber Albus</hi> and the
founder of the City of London School. There is little
known of the foundation of this latter school beyond
the statement made by Stow a century and a-half
later, that he "gave tenements to the city for the
finding and bringing up of four poor men's children
with meat, drink, apparel, learning at the schools in
the universities, etc., until they be preferred, and<pb n="350" /><anchor id="Pg350" />
then others in their places for ever."<note place="foot"><p>Stow's Survey (Thoms's ed., 1876), p. 42.</p></note> Within the
last few years the City Chamberlain's accounts&mdash;touching
"the lands of Mr. John Carpenter, sometyme
commen clarke of this cittie"&mdash;have been brought
to light, and serve to supplement in a small way
Stow's meagre but valuable statement. The rental
or amount with which the Chamberlain charged
himself for the year 1565 or 1566 is there set down
as £41 0<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, and the discharge&mdash;embracing a quit
rent due to the Dean and Chapter of Westminster,
and expenses incurred in overseeing, clothing and
feeding four poor children "being founde at scoole
and lerning by the bequeste of the sayde Master
Carpenter"&mdash;amounted to £19 12<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, leaving a
balance to the City of £21 7<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi><note place="foot"><p>Chamber Accounts (Town Clerk's office), i, fos. 202b, 203.</p></note> From so modest
a beginning arose the school which, situate on the
Thames Embankment, now numbers over 700 scholars.</p>

<note place="margin">St. Paul's School.</note>

<p>There was a school attached to St. Paul's long
before Colet's day, just as there is one now, independent
of the school of Colet's foundation, and devoted
mainly to the instruction of the Cathedral choristers.
Soon after Colet's appointment to the Deanery in
1505 he experienced no little dissatisfaction with
the Cathedral School, where great laxity prevailed,
more especially in the religious education of the
"children of Paul's," and so, about the year 1509&mdash;the
year of Henry's accession&mdash;having recently come
into a considerable estate by the death of his father,
he set about acquiring a small property situate at the
east end of St. Paul's Church for the purpose of
establishing another school which would better realise<pb n="351" /><anchor id="Pg351" /><index index="toc" level1="DEAN COLLET AND ST. PAUL'S SCHOOL." />
his own ideal of what a school should be than the
existing Cathedral School. Colet's School grew apace.
In 1511 he was in negotiation with the Court of
Aldermen for the purchase "of a certen grounde of
the citie for an entre to be hadde into his new
gramer scole."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fos. 121b, 123.</p></note> By January of the next year (1512)
he had succeeded in obtaining the assent both of the
Court of Aldermen and Common Council to the
purchase by him of a "certen grounde in the Olde
Chaunge for the inlargyng of his gramer scole in
Powly's Churcheyerd" for the sum of £30.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 126b; Journal 11, fo. 147b.</p></note> The
property was conveyed to him by deed, dated the
27th September, which deed was sealed with the
common seal on the 7th October following.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 11, fo. 163; Repertory 2, fos. 133b, 142.</p></note> The
question as to whom he should entrust the management
of his school caused Colet no little anxiety.
He eventually decided to confide its revenues and
management entirely to the Mercers' Company, and
when asked the reason for his so doing replied that
"though there was nothing certain in human affairs
he yet found the least corruption in them."<note place="foot"><p>Letter of Erasmus to Justus Jonas quoted in Lupton's Life of
Colet, pp. 166, 167.</p></note></p>

<p>Considerable rivalry existed among the various
grammar schools of the city, more especially between
the boys of Colet's School and the boys of the more
ancient foundation of St. Antony, which, for a long
time, had the reputation for turning out the best
scholars. Public disputations were held in the open
air. The St. Paul's boys meeting St. Antony's boys
would derisively call them St. Antony's pigs, that
saint being generally represented with a pig following<pb n="352" /><anchor id="Pg352" />
him, and challenge them to a disputation; the latter
would retaliate by styling their rivals "pigeons of
St. Paul's," from the bird which then, as now, frequented
St. Paul's Churchyard. From questions of
grammar, writes Stow,<note place="foot"><p>Survey (Thoms's ed., 1876), p. 28.</p></note> they usually fell to blows
"with their satchels full of books, many times in
great heaps, that they troubled the streets and
passengers." After the decay of St. Antony's School
the rivalry was taken up, but in a more friendly way,
by the later foundation of the Merchant Taylors'
School.</p>

<note place="margin">Provincial grammar schools founded by citizens of London.</note>

<p>But the citizens of London did not limit their
efforts in the cause of education to their own city.
Throughout the country there are to be found
grammar schools which owe their establishment to
the liberal-mindedness and open-handed generosity of
the city merchant.<note place="foot"><p>"The number of grammar schools, in various parts of the country,
which owe their foundation and endowment to the piety and liberality
of citizens of London ... far exceeds what might be supposed,
approaching as it does nearly to a hundred."&mdash;Preface to Brewer's Life
of Carpenter, p. xi.</p></note> Their existence bears testimony
to the kindly feeling which men who had grown rich
in London still bore to the provincial town or village
which gave them birth and which they had left in
early life to seek their fortune in the great metropolis.</p>

<p>To take but a few instances: Sir John Percival,
a merchant-tailor, who in 1487 filled the subordinate
office of Lord Mayor's carver, performing his duties
so well that the mayor, Sir Henry Colet, nominated
him one of the sheriffs for the year ensuing by the
time honoured custom of drinking to him at a public
dinner, founded a school at Macclesfield. Stephen<pb n="353" /><anchor id="Pg353" /><index index="toc" level1="PROVINCIAL SCHOOLS FOUNDED BY CITIZENS." />
Jenyns, another merchant-tailor, did the same thing at
Wolverhampton. Sir Thomas White, another member
of the same company, founded two schools in the
provinces, one at Reading and another at Bristol,
besides the College of St. John at Oxford. Sir
William Harper, yet another merchant-tailor, established
a school at Bedford.</p>

<p>The Mercers' Company rivalled the Merchant-Taylors'
in the number of schools established in the
country through the liberality of its members. Sir
John Gresham founded one at Holt, in Norfolk; Sir
Rowland Hill, an ancestor of the originator of the
Penny Postal scheme, another at Drayton, in Shropshire;
whilst schools at Horsham, in Sussex, and
West Lavington, in Wiltshire, were erected by two
other mercers, Richard Collier and William Dauntsey.
There exist at the present day at least four schools
which owe their foundation to wealthy members of
the Grocers' Company, the well known school at
Oundle, co. Northampton, upon which the Company
have expended on capital account the sum of
£35,000, having been founded by Sir William Laxton;
another at Sevenoaks, in Kent, by William Sevenoke,
a native of the place, who rose from very humble
circumstances to the chief magistracy of the city;
another at Witney, in Oxfordshire, by Henry Box,
and another at Colwall, co. Hereford, by Humphry
Walwyn. Sir Andrew Judd, a member of the Skinners'
Company, established a school at Tonbridge, whilst
Sir Wolstan Dixie, another skinner, performed the
same charitable act at Market Bosworth. Lastly,
Sir George Monoux and Thomas Russell, both of
them members of the Drapers' Company, founded<pb n="354" /><anchor id="Pg354" />
schools at Walthamstow and at Barton-under-Needwood,
co. Stafford, respectively.</p>

<note place="margin">Birth of the Princess Mary, Feb., 1516.</note>

<p>On the Feast of St. Matthew (21 Sept.), 1515, a
messenger arrived in the city from Wolsey desiring
the mayor and aldermen to attend that evening at
St. Paul's to return thanks to Almighty God for the
queen, who was quick with child. The summons was
obeyed,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fo. 46.</p></note> and in the following February (1516) the
Princess Mary was born.</p>

<note place="margin">The city and Cardinal Wolsey, 1516.</note>

<p>By this time Wolsey had risen to be a great
power in the State. In 1514 he had been made
Archbishop of York, and in the following year a
cardinal. His high position as a prince of the Church,
as well as his authority with the king, rendered it
desirable for the citizens to keep well with him. On
the 6th March, 1516, it was resolved to send a deputation
to the cardinal for the purpose of securing his
favour. No expense was to be spared in the matter,
and all costs and charges were to be paid by the
Chamber.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 70b, 71.</p></note> In the following June the cardinal handed
to the mayor a list of abuses in the city which required
reform. Sedition was rife there; the commons were
disobedient, the statute of apparel was ignored, vagabonds
and masterless folk resorted there and unlawful
games were allowed in houses. The king's council
required an answer on these points within a few days,
and an answer was accordingly given, but the purport
of it is not recorded, although it was read to the
Court of Aldermen before being despatched.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 86, 86b, 88.</p></note></p>

<p>In November of the same year (1516) the City
was in difficulties with the recently erected Court of<pb n="355" /><anchor id="Pg355" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY BEFORE THE STAR CHAMBER." />
Star Chamber, and Wolsey, who practically kept the
whole business of government in his own hands, came
to the City's assistance with advice. It appears that
a subsidy was due on the 21st of this month and the
City had not paid its quota. The mayor and aldermen
were cited to appear before the cardinal and other lords
of the council in the Star Chamber at Westminster.
Being asked if they had "sworne for their assayng,"
to the king's subsidy, the Recorder answered on their
behalf that such procedure was contrary to Act of
Parliament. The cardinal thereupon advised them to
agree to give the king £2,000 in order to be discharged
of their oaths "or ells every of theym to be sworn of
and uppon the true value of their substance within
the sum of 100 marks." This took place on Saturday,
the 22nd, and the mayor and aldermen were to give
an answer to the Star Chamber by the following
Wednesday. On Tuesday, the 25th, the Court of
Aldermen met to consider what was best to be done
under the circumstances. The decision they arrived
at was that as the present assessment was less than
the last, they would, in consideration of the king's
letters, make up the sum then payable so that it
should equal the last assessment.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fos. 116, 116b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Evil Mayday, 1517.</note>

<p>The seditious "brutes" or riots of which Wolsey
had complained as daily occurring in the city were
soon to assume a serious form. They were occasioned
for the most part by the jealousy with which everybody
who was not a freeman of the city was looked
upon by the free citizen. The influx of strangers and
foreigners has been daily increasing, notwithstanding
the limitations and restrictions placed upon their<pb n="356" /><anchor id="Pg356" />
residence and mode of trading,<note place="foot"><p>Wares bought and sold between strangers&mdash;"foreign bought and
sold"&mdash;were declared forfeited to the City by Letters Patent of Henry
VII, 23 July. 1505, confirmed by Henry VIII, 12 July, 1523.</p></note> whilst the tendency
of freemen had been to leave the city for the
country.<note place="foot"><p>In 1500, and again in 1516, orders were issued for all freemen to
return with their families to the city on pain of losing their freedom.&mdash;Journal
10. fos. 181b, 259.</p></note></p>

<p>Whilst the civic authorities were doing all they
could to prevent the possibility of a disturbance
arising on the coming May-day<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fos. 141b, 142.</p></note>&mdash;a day kept as a
general holiday in the city&mdash;occasion was taken by
a minister of the church, whose duty it was to preach
the usual Spital sermon on Easter Tuesday (14 April),
to incite the freemen to rise up against the foreigner
and stranger.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 618.</p></note> When the 1st May arrived all might
have been well, had not a city alderman allowed his
zeal to outrun his discretion. It happened that John
Mundy,<note place="foot"><p>Or Munday; the name is said to appear in twenty-seven different
forms. He was a goldsmith by trade, and was appointed (among
others) by Cardinal Wolsey to report upon the assay of gold and silver
coinage in 1526.&mdash;Journal 13, fo. 45b; Letter Book O, fo. 71b.  He
served sheriff, 1514; and was mayor in 1522.</p></note> Alderman of Queenhithe Ward, came across
some youngsters playing "at the bucklers" at a time
when by a recent order they should have been within
doors, and he commanded them to desist. This they
showed no disposition to do, and when force was
threatened raised the cry for 'prentices and clubs. A
large crowd quickly assembled and the alderman had
to beat a hasty retreat. The mob, now thoroughly
roused, proceeded to set free the prisoners in Newgate
and the compters, and to attack the strangers and<pb n="357" /><anchor id="Pg357" /><index index="toc" level1="EVIL&mdash;MAY-DAY." />
foreigners quartered at Blanchappleton<note place="foot"><p>In 1462 the Common Council ordered basket-makers, gold wire-drawers,
and other foreigners plying a craft within the city, to reside
at Blanchappleton&mdash;a manor in the vicinity of Mark Lane&mdash;and not
elsewhere.</p></note> and elsewhere.
Rioting continued throughout the night, but early the
following morning they were met by a large force which
the mayor in the meantime had collected, and 300 of
them were made prisoners, so that by the time that
assistance arrived from the court quiet had been
restored. A commission of Oyer and Terminer was
opened at the Guildhall to try the offenders. John
Lincoln, who had not so long ago been appointed
surveyor of goods bought and sold by foreigners,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fo. 55b.</p></note> was
charged with being the instigator of the riot, and being
found guilty was hanged in Cheapside, whilst twelve
others were hanged on gallows in different parts of
the city. Others received the king's pardon with
halters round their necks in token of the fate they
deserved.<note place="foot"><p>For an account of the riot and subsequent proceedings, see
Holinshed, iii, 621-623, and the Grey Friars Chron. (Camd. Soc.,
No. 53). p. 30.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City anxious to regain the king's lost favour.</note>

<p>The civic authorities were not unnaturally anxious
to make their peace with the king, and to disclaim
any complicity in the late outbreak. The Court of
Aldermen met on the 11th May to consider how
best to approach his majesty on so delicate a subject.
It was decided to send a deputation to the lord
cardinal to "feel his mind" as to the number of
persons that should appear before the king. The
next day eight aldermen and the Recorder were
nominated by the court "to go the Kinges grace and
to knowe his plesure when the Mayr and Aldremen<pb n="358" /><anchor id="Pg358" />
and diverse of the substancyall commoners of this
citie shall sue to beseche his grace to be good and
gracious lord un to theym and to accept theym
nowe beyng most sorrowful and hevye for thees
late attemptates doon ayeynst their wylles."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fos. 143, 143b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A deputation attends the king at Greenwich, 11 May, 1517.</note>

<note place="margin">Wolsey and other lords to be bought over with gifts.</note>

<note place="margin">The king's pardon obtained, 22 May.</note>

<p>The deputation forthwith proceeded, clothed in
gowns of black, to Greenwich, whither the king had
gone on the 11th May. The Recorder as usual acted
as spokesman, and humbly prayed the royal forgiveness
for the negligence displayed by the mayor in not
keeping the king's peace within the city. The king
in reply told them plainly his opinion that the civic
authorities had winked at the whole business, and
referred them to Cardinal Wolsey, his chancellor,
who would declare to them his pleasure.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 624.</p></note> With
this answer the deputation withdrew and reported
what had taken place to the mayor, who had wisely
kept away. It was clear that above all things the
favour of the cardinal had to be obtained. For this
purpose a committee was appointed, whose duty it
was to "devise what thinges of plesur shalbe geven
to my lord Cardynall and to other of the lordes as
they shall thynk convenient for their benevolences
doon concernyng this last Insurreccioun."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fo. 144b.</p></note> By the
22nd May matters had evidently been accommodated.
On that date the king sat at Westminster Hall in
great state, surrounded by the lords of his council and
attended by the cardinal. The mayor and aldermen
and chief commoners of the city, chosen from the
leading civic companies,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 143b.</p></note> had arrived by nine o'clock
in the morning clad in their best liveries, "according<pb n="359" /><anchor id="Pg359" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY OBTAINS THE KING'S PARDON." />
as the cardinal had commanded them."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, 624.</p></note> Wolsey
knew the king's weakness for theatrical display. At
Henry's command all the prisoners were brought
into his presence. They appeared, to the number of
400 men and eleven women, all with ropes round
their necks. After the cardinal had administered a
rebuke to the civic authorities for their negligence,
and had declared that the prisoners had deserved
death, a formal pardon was proclaimed by the king,
the cardinal exhorting all present to loyalty and
obedience. It was some time before the effects of
the late outbreak disappeared. Compensation for
losses had to be made;<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fo. 145b.</p></note> some were bound over to
keep the peace;<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 145.</p></note> and counsel were employed to
draw up a statement of the points of grievance between
the citizens and merchant strangers for submission
to the king.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fo. 165.</p></note> In September there were
rumours of another outbreak, but the civic authorities
were better prepared than formerly, and effectually
stopt any such attempt by putting suspected persons
into prison.</p>

<p>Lest any unfavourable report should reach the
cardinal, the Recorder and another were ordered to
ride in all haste to Sion, where Wolsey was thought to
be, and if they failed to find him there, to follow him
to Windsor and to report to him the active measures
that had been taken to prevent any further insurrection
in the city.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 166.</p></note> "Evil May-day" was long remembered
by the citizens, who raised objection to Thomas
Semer or Seymer, who had been sheriff at the<pb n="360" /><anchor id="Pg360" />
time, being elected mayor ten years later.<note place="foot"><p>"Thys yere was much a doo in the yelde-halle for the mayer for
the comyns wold not have had Semer, for be cause of yell May-day."&mdash;Grey
Friars Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 53), p. 33.</p></note> In May,
1547, all householders were straitly charged not to permit
their servants any more to go maying, but to keep
them within doors.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 351b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The epidemic of 1518.</note>

<p>With gibbets all over the city, each bearing a
ghastly freight, and the summer approaching, it is
scarcely surprising that the city should soon again be
visited with an epidemic. "At the city gates," wrote
an eye-witness, "one sees nothing but gibbets and the
quarters of these wretches"&mdash;the wretches who had
been hanged for complicity in the late disturbance&mdash;"so
that it is horrible to pass near them."<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers, For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. ii,
pt. i, Pref., p. ccxxi.</p></note> The
"sweating sickness," which had again made its appearance
in 1516, and had never really quitted the
city (except for a few weeks in winter), now raged
more violently than ever, accompanied by measles
and small-pox. The king ordered all inhabitants of
infected houses to keep indoors and hang out wisps
of straw, and when compelled to walk abroad to carry
white rods.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, vol. ii, pt. ii, p. 1276.</p></note> This order, however, was badly received
in the city and gave rise to much murmuring and
dissatisfaction.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fos. 184b, 189b, 191, 192.</p></note> The civic authorities did what they
could to mitigate the evil by driving out beggars
and vagabonds, and removing slaughter-houses outside
the city walls,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book N, fo. 95b.</p></note> as well as by administering relief to the
poorer classes by the distribution of tokens or licences<pb n="361" /><anchor id="Pg361" /><index index="toc" level1="AN EPIDEMIC IN THE CITY." />
to solicit alms. These tokens consisted of round
"beedes" of white tin, bearing the City's arms in
the centre, to be worn on the right shoulder.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fos. 192, 194; Letter Book N, fos. 63b, 74.</p></note> In
the midst of so much real suffering, there were
not wanting those who took advantage of the charitable
feeling which the crisis called forth and were not
ashamed to gain a livelihood by simulating illness.
Such a one was Miles Rose, who on the 11th March,
1518, openly confessed before the Court of Aldermen
that he had frequently dissembled the sickness of
the "fallyng evyle" (or epilepsy) in divers parish
churches in the city, on which occasions "jemewes"
of silver, called cramp rings, would as often as not
be placed on his fingers by charitable passers-by, with
which he would quickly make off, pocketing at the
same time many a twopence which had been bestowed
upon him.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 3, fo. 197.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Marriage of the infant Princess Mary with the Dauphin, 5 Oct., 1518.</note>

<p>The city could scarcely have recovered its wonted
appearance after the ravages of the pestilence before
its streets were enlivened with one of those magnificent
displays for which London became justly famous,
the occasion being an embassy from the French king
sent to negotiate a marriage treaty between Henry's
daughter Mary, a child but two years of age, and
the still younger Dauphin of France. The City
Records, strange to say, appear to be altogether
silent on this subject, and yet the embassy, for
magnificent display, was such as had never been seen
within its walls before. We can understand that the
embassy was not acceptable to the thrifty middle-class
trading burgess, when we read that it was accompanied<pb n="362" /><anchor id="Pg362" />
by a swarm of pedlars and petty hucksters who
showed an unbecoming anxiety to do business in
hats, caps and other merchandise, which under colour
of the embassy had been smuggled into the country
duty free.<note place="foot"><p>Hall's Chron., pp. 593, 594.</p></note> The foreign retail trader was at the best of
times an abomination to the free burgess, and this sharp
practice on the part of the Frenchmen, coming so soon
after the recent outburst against strangers on Evil
May-day, only served to accentuate his animosity&mdash;"At
this dooing mannie an Englishman grudged, but
it availed not."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 632.</p></note> The ambassadors were lodged at
the Merchant Taylors' Hall, which, owing to the
ill-timed action of the French pedlars, had the look of
a mart. On Sunday, the 3rd October, the king, with
a train of 1,000 mounted gentlemen richly dressed,
attended by the legates and foreign ambassadors, went
in procession to St. Paul's to hear mass; after which
the king took his oath&mdash;a ceremonial which the French
admiral declared to be "too magnificent for description."
On the following Tuesday (5 Oct.) the marriage
ceremony&mdash;so far as it could be carried out
between such infants&mdash;was celebrated at Greenwich,
and a tiny gold ring, in which was a valuable diamond,
placed upon Mary's finger.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers, For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. ii.
pt. i, Pref., pp. clx, clxi.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Preparations for the reception of the legate in the city, July, 1519.</note>

<p>In the following year (July, 1519) the streets
witnessed another scene of gaiety. This time it was
a visit of the legate, Cardinal Campeggio, for which
the civic authorities made great preparations.<note place="foot"><p>"An order devysed by the Mayer and hys brethrern the aldremen
by the Kynges commandment for a Tryumphe to be done in the Citie of
London at the Request of the Right honorable ambassadors of the
Kynge of Romayns."&mdash;10 July, Journal 12, fo. 9.</p></note> In<pb n="363" /><anchor id="Pg363" /><index index="toc" level1="RECEPTION OF CARDINAL CAMPEGGIO." />
the first place the mayor and aldermen, in their gowns
and cloaks of scarlet, were ordered to take up their
position at 9 o'clock on the morning of Relic Sunday
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, the third Sunday after Midsummer Day) at St.
Paul's stairs (<hi rend="font-style: italic">the stayers w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi>in poulys</hi>). Next to them
were to stand the Skinners, then the Mercers and
other worshipful crafts in their order, clothed in their
last and best livery. In this manner the street was
to be lined on either side from the west door of St.
Paul's down to Baynard's Castle. Upon the arrival
of the lord cardinal and other lords at the Cathedral
the mayor and aldermen were to head the procession
and seat themselves in the choir to hear <hi rend="font-style: italic">Te Deum</hi>
sung. Bonfires or "pryncypall fyres" were to be
lighted at St. Magnus corner, Gracechurch, Leadenhall,
the conduit on Cornhill, St. Thomas "of Acres,"
the Standard and little conduit in Cheap, the Standard
in Fleet Street, and in Bishopsgate Street; whilst
cresset lights and small fires "made after the manner
of Midsummer-night" were to add to the gaiety of the
scene. Men-at-arms, well harnessed and apparelled,
were to keep certain streets, whilst the aldermen and
their constables were to keep watch and ward in their
best array of harness. The ambassadors, who were to
be lodged in Cornhill, were to be escorted home at night
by the aldermen with torches, and to await their commands.
There was one other, perhaps not unnecessary,
direction to be followed, which was to the effect that
if by any chance the strangers should be overcome
by the hospitality of the city, or, in the words of the
record&mdash;"yf eny oversyght be w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi> moche drynke of
the strangers"&mdash;the citizens were to "lett theym
alone and no Englishemen to medyle w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi> theym."</p>

<pb n="364" /><anchor id="Pg364" />

<note place="margin">The legate lands at Deal, 23 July, 1519.</note>

<note place="margin">A story told of his passage through the city.</note>

<p>The legate landed at Deal on the 23rd July, and
by slow stages was conducted with every mark of
respect to London. His passage through the city
was associated with an episode of a decidedly comic
character if we are to believe the chronicler. A story
is told<note place="foot"><p>Hall, pp. 592, 593.</p></note> that the night before Campeggio entered
London, Wolsey sent him twelve mules with (empty)
coffers, in order to give a semblance of wealth to the
legate and his retinue. In Cheapside one of the mules
turned restive and upset the chests, out of which
tumbled old hose, shoes, bread, meat, and eggs, with
"muche vile baggage," at which the street boys cried
"See, see my lord legate's treasure!" The story,
however, is on good authority deemed more malicious
than probable.</p>

<note place="margin">The contest for the empire, 1519.</note>

<p>In January, 1519, the Emperor Maximilian died
and left the imperial crown to be contested for by the
kings of France and Spain. It eventually fell to the
latter, and Charles V of Spain was elected Emperor
Charles I, the event being celebrated by a solemn
mass and <hi rend="font-style: italic">Te Deum</hi> at St. Paul's, followed by a
banquet at Castle Baynard.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 639.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The emperor's visit to the city, 1522.</note>

<p>Both France and Germany were eager to secure
the co-operation of Henry. Charles anticipated the
meeting which was to take place between Henry and
Francis on the famous Field of the Cloth of Gold by
coming over in person to England (May, 1519) and
having a private conference with his uncle. The
young emperor did not visit the city on this occasion;
but in 1522, when war had broken out between him
and Francis and he was again in England, he was<pb n="365" /><anchor id="Pg365" /><index index="toc" level1="THE EMPEROR CHARLES VISITS THE CITY." />
escorted to the city with great honour and handsomely
lodged in the palace of Bridewell. Nearly £1,000
was raised to meet the expenses of his reception and
of furnishing a body of 100 bowmen for the king's
service.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fos. 125, 172b, 173b; Letter Book N, fo. 194b.</p></note></p>

<p>The king and his guest and ally were met at St.
George's Bar in Southwark by John Melborne,<note place="foot"><p>Knighted the next day at Greenwich.&mdash;Repertory 5, fo. 295.</p></note> the
mayor, accompanied by the high officers of the city,
clothed in gowns of "pewke," each with a chain of
gold about his neck.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 5, fo. 294.</p></note> A "proposicioun" or address
was made by Sir Thomas More, now under-treasurer
of England, who was afterwards presented by the
City with the sum of £10 towards a velvet gown,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> 4, fo. 134b.</p></note>
whilst other speeches made in the course of the
procession were composed by Master Lilly,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> 5, fo. 293.</p></note> of
Euphues fame, the first high master of Colet's School.</p>

<note place="margin">Pestilence and famine, 1519-1522.</note>

<p>Between the first and second visits of the emperor
the citizens had witnessed some strange sights and
had gone through much suffering and privation. The
city had scarcely ever been free from sickness, and
famine and pestilence had followed one another in
quick succession. In September, 1520, the fellowships
or civic companies subscribed over £1,000 for
the purchase of wheat<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fos. 75b-76; Letter Book N, fos. 142-143.</p></note> to be stored at the Bridgehouse,
where ovens were fitted up.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 30; Repertory 4, fo. 71b.</p></note> Mills for grinding
corn already existed in the Thames hard by.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fos. 1b, 12, 13.</p></note> The
following year the plague raged to such an extent<pb n="366" /><anchor id="Pg366" />
that every house attacked was ordered to be marked
with St. Antony's cross, "otherwise called the syne
of Tav,"<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 136.</p></note> and citizens were forbidden to attend the
fair at Windsor for fear of carrying infection to the
court.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 144.</p></note></p>

<p>Again a scarcity of corn was feared, and the
Bridge-masters were authorised by the Court of Common
Council to purchase provisions, the corporation
undertaking to give security for the repayment of all
monies advanced by the charitably disposed for the
purpose of staving off famine.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fos. 158, 161, 163b; Letter Book N, fos. 187b, 190b.</p></note> Early in 1522 (15 Jan.)
died Fitz-James, Bishop of London, carried off with
many others by "a great death in London and other
places of the realm."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 675.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Execution of the Duke of Buckingham, 1521.</note>

<p>The citizens had also in the meanwhile witnessed
the arrest and execution of the Duke of Buckingham,
son of the duke who figured so prominently before the
citizens when the crown was offered to Richard III
at Baynard Castle. He was seized one day whilst
landing from his barge at the Hay Wharf, on a
number of charges all more or less frivolous. His
attendants were dismissed to the duke's "Manor of
the Rose," in the parish of St. Laurence Pountney<note place="foot"><p>Shakespere mentions the Duke's manor thus:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">"Not long before your highness sped to France,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">The duke being at the Rose, within the parish</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">St. Laurence Poultney, did of me demand</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">What was the speech among the Londoners</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Concerning the French journey."</l>
</lg>

<p rend="text-align: right">&mdash;Henry VIII, act 1, sc. 2.</p></note>&mdash;on
the site of which recently stood Merchant Taylors'
School&mdash;whilst he himself was conducted to the Tower
(16 April, 1521).  An indictment was laid against<pb n="367" /><anchor id="Pg367" /><index index="toc" level1="TRIAL AND EXECUTION OF BUCKINGHAM." />
him at the Guildhall before Sir John Brugge, lord
mayor, and others (8 May). After a trial at Westminster
which lasted some days, he was found guilty
of high treason, and condemned to be hanged, drawn
and quartered, and to suffer such other atrocities as
usually accompanied the death of a traitor in those
days. The king, however, satisfied with his condemnation,
spared him these indignities, and the duke
was allowed to meet his death at the block. His
corpse was reverently carried from the Tower to the
Church of the Austin Friars by six poor members of
that Order.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers, For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. iii,
pt. i, Pref., pp. cxxv, cxxvi, cxxxv, cxxxvi.</p></note></p>

<p>The duke had other friends in the city besides
these poor religious men, who thus requited in the only
way they could many acts of kindness done to their
Order by Buckingham in his life time, and his death
gave rise to much disaffection and seditious language
for some time afterwards.<note place="foot"><p>On the 5th July steps were taken by the Court of Aldermen for
putting a stop to the mutinous and seditious words that were current in
the city "concerning the lamenting and sorrowing of the death of the
duke"&mdash;men saying that he was guiltless&mdash;and special precautions were
taken for the safe custody of weapons and harness for fear of an outbreak.
The scribe evinced his loyalty by heading the page of the
record with <hi rend="font-style: italic">Lex domini immaculata: Vivat Rex Currat L</hi>.&mdash;Repertory
5, fo. 204.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">City loan of £20,000 to assist the king against France, 1522.</note>

<p>Before the emperor left England he succeeded in
committing Henry to an invasion of France. In order
to carry out his object the king needed money, and
the City was asked to furnish him with the sum of
£100,000.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 5, fo. 288.</p></note> Ten days later (26 May) the City
agreed to advance £20,000. The livery companies
were to be called upon to surrender their plate, and<pb n="368" /><anchor id="Pg368" />
foreigners as well as citizens were to be made to
contribute.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fos. 187b, 188b, 195; Letter Book N, fos. 203b, 204, 208.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The aldermen to be assessed with the commoners and not to be severed.</note>

<p>The question arose whether the aldermen should
be jointly assessed with the commoners or by themselves.
The mayor and aldermen were willing to
contribute the sum of £3,000,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 5, fo. 292.</p></note> but this offer the
Common Council "nothyng regarded," but sent the
common sergeant to talk the matter over with them.
After long consultation the mayor and aldermen sent
back word that it was more "convenient" that they
should be assessed with the commoners and not to be
severed.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 187b.</p></note></p>

<p>In the meantime a hasty valuation had been made
by the command of Wolsey of the plate of the livery
companies, and of the ready money lying in their
halls, the whole value of which was estimated to be
£4,000. This, together with the sum of £10,000
which the Court of Aldermen purposed raising among
the wealthier class of citizens, was all that the cardinal
was given to expect from the City.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 5, fos. 289, 290.</p></note> On the 24th
May the deputation, which had ridden with all speed
after the cardinal in order to make this report, returned
to the city and reported to the Court of Aldermen
that his grace was in no wise satisfied with the City's
offer, and that he expected the City to furnish the king
with at least £30,000, of which £10,000 was to be
ready within three days.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 291.</p></note> The matter was compromised
by the City consenting to advance £20,000.</p>

<p>In June the Recorder had an interview with Wolsey
respecting the security to be given for repayment<pb n="369" /><anchor id="Pg369" /><index index="toc" level1="LIVERY COMPANIES TO SURRENDER THEIR PLATE." />
of the loan. The cardinal refused to allow that
certain abbots, abbesses and priors, who had been
named, should enter into bond, and the citizens were
obliged to be content with the personal securities of
the king and Wolsey himself. Touching the plate of
the halls, the cardinal wished only to take it in case
of absolute necessity, and then only at a fair price.
He desired the owners to bring it to the Tower, "there
to be coyned and they [<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi>, the government] to pay
the seyd money that so shalbe coyned." The result
of the Recorder's interview was reported to the Court
of Aldermen the 17th June.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 5, fos. 296b, 297.</p></note> A committee had
already (2 June) to take an account of the plate
brought in and to enter its true weight in a book.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 294.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A further loan of 4,000 marks.</note>

<note place="margin">Letter of thanks from Wolsey, 3 Sept., 1522.</note>

<p>The recent loan of £20,000 had scarcely been
raised<note place="foot"><p>A portion remained unpaid on 16 August.&mdash;Journal 12, fo. 195.</p></note> before the citizens found it necessary to make
a further advance of 4,000 marks. Their liberality
was repaid by a gracious letter from Wolsey himself,
in which he promised to see the money repaid in a
fortnight,<note place="foot"><p>Letter dated 3 Sept.&mdash;Journal 12, fo. 196b. On 28 Sept. Wolsey
asked for more time to repay the loan.&mdash;Repertory 5, fo. 326.</p></note> and to extend to them his favour. What
vexed the citizens more than anything was being
compelled to make oath before the cardinal's deputy
sitting in the Chapter House of St. Paul's as to the
amount each was worth in money, plate, jewels,
household goods and merchandise,&mdash;a system of
inquisition recently introduced.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 200.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City makes a stand against further loans. Nov., 1522.</note>

<note place="margin">Others follow its example.</note>

<p>As if all this were not enough Wolsey demanded
another loan before the end of the year. This was
too much even for the patient and open-handed<pb n="370" /><anchor id="Pg370" />
London burgess. The Common Council determined
(4 Nov.) to put a stop to these extortionate demands,
and resolved that, "As touchyng the Requeste made
by my lorde cardynalles grace for appreste or
aloone of more money to the kynges grace, they
can in no wise agre thereto, but they ar and wilbe
well contendid to be examyned uppon their othes
yf it shall please his grace so to do."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 210.</p></note> The stand
thus made by the citizens against illegal exactions
gave courage to others. The king's commissioners
were forcibly driven out of Kent, and open rebellion
was threatened in other counties.<note place="foot"><p>See Green's "Hist. of the English People," ii, 121. 122.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Appeal to parliament, April, 1523.</note>

<p>There was only one course left open to Henry,
and that was to summon a parliament. For nearly
eight years no parliament had sat. It was now
summoned to meet on the 15th April, 1523, not at
Westminster, but at the house of the Blackfriars.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 31.</p></note>
The names of the city's representatives are on record.
The aldermen elected one of their body, George
Monoux, and with him was associated "according
to ancient customs," the city's Recorder, William
Shelley; whilst the commons elected John Hewster,
a mercer, and William Roche, a draper<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fo. 144; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Repertory 6, fo. 20b; Letter Book N,
fo. 222.</p></note></p>

<p>A few days after the election a committee of
fourteen members was nominated to consider what
matters should be laid before parliament as being for
the welfare of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fo. 145b.</p></note> Sir Thomas More was<pb n="371" /><anchor id="Pg371" /><index index="toc" level1="PARLIAMENT THREATENED BY WOLSEY." />
chosen Speaker. The enormous sum of £800,000
was demanded. Expecting some hesitation on the
part of the Commons, Wolsey himself determined to
argue with them, and suddenly made his appearance
in state. Finding that his speech was received in grim
silence, he turned to More for a reply. The Speaker,
falling on his knees, declared his inability to make
any answer until he had received the instructions of
the House, and intimated that perhaps the silence of
the Commons was due to the cardinal's presence.
Wolsey accordingly departed discomforted.<note place="foot"><p>Roper's "Life of More," pp. 17-20.</p></note> His
attempt to overawe parliament marks the beginning
of his downfall. He still kept well with the city,
however, and rendered it several small services.</p>

<note place="margin">The City and Wolsey, 1523.</note>

<p>Emboldened by their recent success the citizens
determined to make a stand against other exactions,
and when in May, 1523, another demand was made
for one hundred bowmen, as in the previous year,
they sent their charter to the cardinal and begged
that the article touching citizens not being liable to
foreign service might remain in force. A similar
demand was made in the following November, and
again the assistance of Wolsey was called in.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fos. 152, 168; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Repertory 6, fo. 38.</p></note> The
City on the other hand had recently conferred a
favour on the cardinal by discharging Robert Amadas,
his own goldsmith, from serving as alderman when
elected in March of this year.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fos. 144b, 145, 146, 150; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Repertory 6, fos. 22b,
29, 32b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king and queen of Denmark in the city.</note>

<p>In June the king and queen of Denmark paid a
visit to the city and attended mass at St. Paul's,<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron. pp. 30, 31.</p></note><pb n="372" /><anchor id="Pg372" /><index index="toc" level1="LONDON AND THE KINGDOM." />
when the Court of Aldermen made them a present of
two hogsheads of wine, one of white and another of
claret, and two "awmes" of Rhenish wine, two fresh
salmon, a dozen great pike, four dozen of "torchettes,"
and eight dozen of "syses."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fos. 153b-154; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Repertory 6, fo. 42.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">England invaded by the Scots. 1523.</note>

<p>The joint attack of Henry and the emperor
against France in 1523 proved as great a failure as
that of 1522. In the midst of the campaign Henry
was threatened with danger nearer home. The Scots
marched southward, and created such a panic in the
city that a solemn procession, in which figured
Cuthbert Tunstal, Bishop of London (successor to the
unfortunate Fitz-James), the mayor and aldermen, all
the king's justices, and all the sergeants-at-law, took
place every day for a week.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 6, fo. 61b.</p></note> After a futile attack
upon Wark Castle the invaders withdrew and all
danger was over.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 692, 693.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Monoux refuses to accept the mayoralty a second time, Oct., 1523.</note>

<p>When the Feast of St. Edward (13 Oct.) came
round, George Monoux, alderman and draper, who
had already (1514-15) once filled the office of mayor
of the city, was re-elected; but refusing to accept the
call of his fellow-citizens he was fined £1,000. It
was thereupon declared by the Court of Aldermen
that anyone who in future should be elected mayor,
and refused to take up office, should be mulcted in a
like sum.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fos. 249-250.</p></note> Monoux's fine was remitted the following
year, and he was discharged from attendance,
although keeping his aldermanry, on account of ill
health. In return for this favour he made over to the<pb n="373" /><anchor id="Pg373" /><index index="toc" level1="DIPLOMATIC INTRIGUE." />
Corporation his brewhouse situate near the Bridgehouse
in Southwark.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fos. 287-288.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king pledges himself to repay the City loan of £20,000.</note>

<p>Before the close of the year (3 Dec., 1523) the
king pledged himself by letters patent to repay the
loan of £20,000 which the City had advanced for his
defence of the realm and maintenance of the wars
against France and Scotland.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 276.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Formation of a league against France.</note>

<p>The disappointment experienced by Wolsey in
not being selected to fill the Papal chair on the death
of Adrian VI induced him to take measures for transferring
his master's power from the imperial court
to the court of France. In the meantime a league
was formed between Henry, the emperor, and Charles,
Duke of Bourbon, for the conquest and partition of
France. During the formation of this league some
correspondence between England and the Continent
appears to have been lost in a remarkable manner, to
judge from the following proclamation,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 284.</p></note> made the
10th July, 1524:&mdash;</p>

<note place="margin">Proclamation for the recovery of lost letters, 10 July, 1524.</note>

<p rend="display"><hi rend="font-style: italic">"My lorde the maire streitly chargith and commaundith
on the king or soveraigne lordis behalf that
if any maner of person or persons that have founde a
hat with certeyn lettres and other billes and writinges
therin enclosed which lettres been directed to o<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> said
soveraigne lorde from the parties of beyond the see let
hym or theym bryng the said hat lettres and writinges
unto my said lorde the maire in all the hast possible and
they shalbe well rewarded for their labour and that no
maner of person kepe the said hat lettres and writinges
nor noon of them after this proclamacioun made uppon
payn of deth and God save the king."</hi></p>

<pb n="374" /><anchor id="Pg374" />

<note place="margin">The king of France made prisoner at Pavia, 24 Feb., 1525.</note>

<note place="margin">Rejoicing in the city.</note>

<p>The news of the defeat and capture of the
French king at Pavia (24 Feb., 1525) was hailed by
Henry with great delight. The crown of France was
now, he thought, within his grasp. On Saturday, the
11th March, a triumph was made in the city to
celebrate "the takynge of the Frenche kyng in
Bataill by Themporer and his alies."<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book N, fo. 280; Journal 12, fo. 329.</p></note> Bonfires
were lighted at different places, one being in Saint
Paul's Churchyard near the house where lay the
foreign ambassadors. The Chamberlain was ordered
to provide a hogshead of wine at every fire. The
city minstrels filled the air with music, and the parish
clerks attended with their singing children, who sat
about the bonfires and sang ballads and "other
delectable and joyfull songs." On the Sunday
following the king and queen and officers of state
attended a <hi rend="font-style: italic">Te Deum</hi> at St. Paul's, the legate himself
pronouncing the benediction.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 32.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Amicable Loan, 1525.</note>

<p>Henry's first impulse was to take advantage of
the French king's misfortune; the cardinal, on the
other hand, saw danger in the predominating influence
of Charles in Europe, and would gladly have seen his
master join hands with Francis against the emperor.
He was nevertheless bound to carry out the king's
wishes as if they were his own, and money was
necessary for the purpose. Instead of resorting to
a benevolence&mdash;a mode of raising money already
declared by parliament to be illegal&mdash;he suggested
that the people should be asked for what was called
an Amicable Loan, on the old feudal ground that
the king was about to lead an expedition in person.<pb n="375" /><anchor id="Pg375" /><index index="toc" level1="THE AMICABLE LOAN." />
The citizens were among the first to whom Wolsey
made application. Were they of opinion, he asked,
that the king should undertake the expedition to
France in person? If so, he could not go otherwise
than beseemed a prince, and this he could not do
without the city's aid. The sum they were asked to
subscribe did not, he said, amount to half their substance,
which the king might very well have demanded.
When it was objected that trade had been bad,
Wolsey lost his temper and declared that it was
better that some citizens should suffer rather than
that the king should be in want, and that if they
refused to pay it might "fortune to cost some their
heddes."<note place="foot"><p>Hall's Chron., p. 695.</p></note> At length the citizens agreed to grant
the king a sixth part of their substance, which Henry
graciously acknowledged by letter (25 April),<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 331; Letter Book N. fo. 278.</p></note> saying
that it was not his wish to overburden them, for he
valued their prosperity more than ten such realms as
France. The letter was read, by Wolsey's express
wish, to the Common Council on the 28th, when it
was agreed to ask for a fortnight's grace before
sending an answer to so important a missive.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 331b.</p></note> A
deputation was forthwith despatched to Hampton
Court to solicit the cardinal's mediation, but not
being able to obtain an interview they returned, and
steps were taken to raise the money required.</p>

<p>When the cardinal was informed later on that
the alderman of each ward was holding an enquiry as
to the means of the inhabitants he affected to be very
angry. "They had no right to examine anyone," he
said; "I am your commissioner, I will examine you<pb n="376" /><anchor id="Pg376" />
one by one myself." The mayor (Sir William
Bailey) thereupon threw himself at the cardinal's feet
beseeching him that since it was by Act of Common
Council that the aldermen had sat in their respective
wards for the purpose of taking the benevolence&mdash;a
procedure which he now perceived to be against the
law&mdash;the Act should by the Common Council be revoked.
"Well," said Wolsey "I am content," and he
then proceeded to ask how much the mayor and
aldermen then present were prepared to give. When
the mayor incautiously remarked that if he made any
promise there and then it might perhaps cost him his
life, Wolsey again became furious. What! the mayor's
life threatened for obeying the king's orders! He
would see to that.</p>

<p>In the country the loan met with so much
opposition that a rebellion was feared. At length,
finding it was impossible to collect the money, Wolsey
sent (19 May) for the mayor and aldermen and
informed them that the king had given up all
thoughts of his expedition to France, and that they
were pardoned of all that had been demanded of
them.<note place="foot"><p>Hall's Chron., p. 701.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A truce between England and France.</note>

<note place="margin">French ambassadors lodged in the city, 1527.</note>

<p>Before many weeks elapsed Wolsey saw with
satisfaction a truce made between Henry and the
queen regent of France.<note place="foot"><p>The truce was to last from 14 August to 1 December.&mdash;Letter
Book N, fos. 291, 293; Journal 12, fos. 300, 305.</p></note> Early in 1526 the French
king regained his liberty by virtue of a treaty which
he at once repudiated, and war between him and the
emperor was renewed, but England remained virtually
at peace. In the following year (1527) the cardinal<pb n="377" /><anchor id="Pg377" /><index index="toc" level1="A TRUCE WITH FRANCE." />
himself paid a visit to the French king and superintended
the drawing up of articles for a permanent
peace. By September all was settled, and Wolsey
returned to England. Ambassadors from France
shortly afterwards arrived, and were lodged in the
Bishop of London's palace in St. Paul's Churchyard.
The City made them valuable presents at the
instance of the lord cardinal.<note place="foot"><p>"Item in lyke wyse the Chamberleyn shall have allowance of and
for suche gyftes and presentes as were geven presentyd on Sonday laste
passyd at the Bysshoppes palace at Paules to the Ambassadours of
Fraunce devysed and appoynted by my lorde Cardynalles Grace and
most specyally at his contemplacioun geven for asmoch as lyke
precedent in so ample maner hath not afore tyme be seen; the presents
ensue etc."&mdash;Repertory 7, fo. 225.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Troubles over Wythypol's election as alderman, 1527-1528.</note>

<note place="margin">Wythypol again summoned to take office.</note>

<note place="margin">Committed to Newgate, 6 Feb., 1528.</note>

<note place="margin">Again summoned to take office, 22 May.</note>

<p>The election of Paul Wythypol,<note place="foot"><p>He had been one of the commoners sent to confer with Wolsey
touching the amicable loan (Journal 12, fo. 331b). He attended the
coronation banquet of Anne Boleyn in 1533 (Repertory 9, fo. 2), and
was M.P. for the city from 1529-1536 (Letter Book O, fo. 157). His
daughter Elizabeth married Emanuel Lucar, also a merchant-tailor.&mdash;Repertory
9, fos. 139. 140.</p></note> a merchant-tailor,
as alderman of the Ward of Farringdon Within,
in 1527, again brought Henry and the citizens into
variance. The king desired Wythypol's discharge, at
least for a time. The Court of Aldermen hesitated
to accede to the request and consulted Wolsey.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 7, fos. 171b, 172, 174b, 179.</p></note> He
recommended them an interview with the king at
Greenwich. To Greenwich they accordingly went
(24 Feb.) by water, where they arrived in time to
give a formal reception to the cardinal, who landed
soon afterwards from his barge. After a few words
had passed between the cardinal and the municipal
officers, the former entered the palace, whilst the
latter waited in the king's great chamber till dinner
time. When that hour arrived they were bidden to go
down to the hall, where the mayor was entertained<pb n="378" /><anchor id="Pg378" />
at the lord steward's mess, and the aldermen received
like attention from the comptroller and other officers
of state. The city's Counsel who had accompanied
the mayor and aldermen were entertained at the
table of "master coferer." Dinner over, the company
returned to the great chamber, where they
were kept waiting till the evening. At length the
mayor and aldermen were bidden to the king's
presence in his secret chamber. What took place
there the writer of the record declares himself unable
to say,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 7, fos. 179b, 180.</p></note> and, although the mayor afterwards made a
report of the matter to the court, no particulars are
recorded in the City's archives. The practical outcome
of the interview appears to have been that
Wythypol was left unmolested for a whole twelve-month.
When that time had elapsed he was again
summoned before the Court of Aldermen either to
accept office or take the oath prescribed.<note place="foot"><p>To the effect that he was not worth £1,000.&mdash;Journal 7, fo. 198.</p></note> Refusing
both these propositions he was committed to Newgate.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 7, fos. 238b, 240, 240b.</p></note>
This took place on the 6th February, 1528. On the
3rd March he appeared in person before the Court of
Aldermen and desired a respite from office, or to be
allowed to pay a fine. Being asked the amount of
fine he was prepared to pay, he offered £40, and at
the same time asked to be discharged from office for
a period of three years. This offer was declined,
and Wythypol was again ordered to take the oath
prescribed for his discharge.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 243b.</p></note> Nearly three months
were allowed to elapse before any further steps
were taken, when, on the 22nd May, the court<pb n="379" /><anchor id="Pg379" /><index index="toc" level1="PAUL WYTHYPOL, MERCHANT-TAILOR." />
again ordered Wythypol to appear at its next
meeting, and to take up office, or else take the
oath, or pay such fine as should be assessed by the
mayor, aldermen and common council.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 7, fo. 206. The Common Council assessed the fine at
£100.&mdash;Journal 13, fo. 61b; Letter Book O, fo. 80b.</p></note> It is
certain that he did not take office, so the conclusion
must be that he availed himself of one or other of
the alternatives open to him. John Brown was
elected alderman of Farringdon Within shortly afterwards,
but he was discharged by the Common
Council, and the aldermanry was subsequently filled
by John Hardy being translated to it from Aldersgate
Ward.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 7, fo. 264.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A great dearth in the city, 1529.</note>

<p>In addition to an epidemic of sickness,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 13, fo. 184b.</p></note> the city
was threatened the following year with a famine,
notwithstanding the fact that large quantities of grain
had been stored up in various parts of the city by
order of the municipal authorities. The country had
suffered recently by heavy rains, and large tracts of
land had been inundated. In anticipation of trouble,
a large stock of wheat had been laid in, but when it
came to the point of disposing of it, the bakers of the
city and the bakers of Stratford-at-Bow declined to
take it except at their own price, until compelled by
threats and, in some cases, imprisonment.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book O, fos. 88b, 89b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The legatine court at the Blackfriars, 1529.</note>

<p>For some years past Henry had been meditating
a divorce from Catherine of Aragon, his brother's
widow, but it was not until 1529 that the assent of
the Pope was at last obtained to try the validity of
the marriage. The legatine court sat in the city at<pb n="380" /><anchor id="Pg380" />
the house of the Blackfriars, where every arrangement
was made to add dignity to the proceedings. At its
head sat the two cardinals, Campeggio and Wolsey,
on chairs covered with cloth of gold, and on their
right sat Henry himself.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. iv,
Introd., p. cccclxv.</p></note> The sudden suspension of
all proceedings after the court had sat for some weeks,
and the revocation of the cause to the Court of Rome,
led to Wolsey's downfall. In October the seals were
taken from him and given to Sir Thomas More, his
furniture and plate were seized, and he himself ordered
to remove from London.</p>

<note place="margin">The lord mayor's banquet, 28 Oct., 1529.</note>

<p>A few days after Wolsey's disgrace a banquet
was held at the Guildhall on the occasion of the
swearing in of Ralph Dodmer, the newly-elected
mayor. It is the first lord mayor's banquet of which
any particulars have come down to us, and they are
interesting as recording the names of the chief guests.
The mayor's court, the scene of the feast, was
boarded and hung with cloth of Arras for the occasion.
One table was set apart for peers of the realm, at the
head of which sat the new lord chancellor and at the
bottom the lords Berkeley and Powis. At either side of
the table sat nine peers, among whom were the dukes
of Norfolk and Suffolk, the one being the treasurer and
the other the marshal of England, Sir Thomas Grey,
Marquis of Dorset, the Earl of Oxford, high chamberlain,
and the Earl of Shrewsbury, lord steward of
England, Tunstal, Bishop of London, Sir Thomas
Boleyn, Lord Rochford, whose daughter Anne was
shortly to experience the peril of sharing Henry's
throne, Lord Audley, and others.  At two other<pb n="381" /><anchor id="Pg381" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FALL OF WOLSEY." />
tables, placed between the court of orphans and the
mayor's court, were entertained a number of knights
and other gentlemen, whose names are not recorded.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book O, fos. 174b-175; Journal 13, fo. 180b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The fall of Wolsey, 1529-1530.</note>

<p>It was not long before further proceedings were
taken against the king's late minister. On the 3rd
November (1529), after the lapse of six years, parliament
met in the city at the palace of Bridewell.
The City was represented by Thomas Seymer, an
alderman and ex-mayor, John Baker, the City's Recorder,
John Petyte, grocer, and Paul Wythypol,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book O, fo. 157.</p></note> the
merchant-tailor whose election as alderman had recently
created no little trouble. Among other members
was Thomas Cromwell,<note place="foot"><p>About the year 1522 Cromwell was living in the city, near Fenchurch,
combining the business of a merchant with that of a money-lender.
He sat in the parliament of 1523, and towards the close of
that year served on a wardmote inquest for Bread Street Ward. In 1524
he entered Wolsey's service.&mdash;Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom.
(Henry VIII.), vol. iii, pt. i, Introd., pp. cclvi, cclvii.</p></note> a friend of Wolsey, and destined
soon to take his place as the king's chief adviser. A
bill for disabling the cardinal from being restored to
his former dignities was carried by the Lords and sent
down to the Commons (1 Dec.). There it is said to
have met with the strenuous opposition of Cromwell.
Of this, however, there is some doubt, as it is uncertain
whether the bill provoked any discussion, parliament
being shortly afterward prorogued (17 Dec.)
and the unhappy cardinal left in suspense as to what
fate was in store for him.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. iv,
Introd., pp. dliii-dlvi.</p></note> At Christmas he fell ill,
and the king's heart became so far softened towards
his old favourite that early in the following year
(Feb., 1530) he was restored to the archbishopric of<pb n="382" /><anchor id="Pg382" />
York with all its possessions except York-place
(Whitehall) in Westminster, which Henry could not
bring himself to surrender. His colleges were seized;
the college he had founded at Ipswich was sold; but
his college at Oxford, known as Cardinal College, was
afterwards re-established under the name of Christ
Church. He himself was not allowed to rest long in
peace. He was summoned to London on a charge of
treason, for which there was little or no foundation,
but the troubles of the last two years had rendered
him so infirm that he died on the way.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="383" /><anchor id="Pg383" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XIV.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="THE HOUSE OF COMMONS AND THE CLERGY." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">The House of Commons and the Clergy, 1529.</note>

<p>Although Wolsey was no more, his works followed
him. He it was, and not Henry, who first conceived
the idea of church reform, towards which some steps
had been taken in Wolsey's lifetime. It was left for
Henry to carry out the design of his great minister.
When the king laid his hand on the monasteries, he
only followed the example set by the cardinal in 1525,
when some of the smaller religious houses in Kent,
Sussex and Essex were suppressed for his great foundation
of Oxford. To assist him in carrying out his design
he turned to parliament. Relieved as they now were
of the oppression of the great nobles, the Commons
were ready to use their newly-acquired independence
against the clergy, who exacted extravagant fees and misused
the powers of the ecclesiastical courts. Acts were
passed regulating the payment of mortuary fees and
the fees for probate, whilst another Act restricted the
holding of pluralities and the taking of ferms by church-men.<note place="foot"><p>Stat. 21, Henry VIII, caps. 5, 6 and 13.</p></note>
The clergy threatened to appeal to Rome,
but were warned that such action would be met
with pains and penalties as opposed to the royal
prerogative.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, 12 Sept., 1530.&mdash;Letter Book O, fo. 199b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Disputes touching tithes payable to city clergy, 1527-1534.</note>

<p>In the city the question of tithes payable to the
clergy had been always more or less a vexed question.
Before the commencement of the thirteenth century
the city clergy had been supported by casual dues in<pb n="384" /><anchor id="Pg384" />
addition to their glebe land. These casual payments
were originally personal, but subsequently became
regulated by the amount of rent paid by parishioners
for their houses. A question arose as to whether the
citizens were also liable to pay personal tithes on
their gains, and it was eventually decided that they
were so liable.<note place="foot"><p>Burnell, "London (City) Tithes Act, 1879," Introd., pp. 1, 2.</p></note></p>

<p>On the 31st August, 1527, a committee, which
had been specially appointed to enquire into matters
concerning the city's welfare, reported, among other
things, upon the tithe question as it then stood in the
city.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book O, fos. 47, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi></p></note> The "curates," they said, had purchased a
Bull of Pope Nicholas, on the 6th August, 1453, and
this Bull had been confirmed by Act of Common
Council on the 3rd March, 1475. Not only was the
amount of the tithe payable fixed by the Bull, but the
Bull itself was to be publicly read by the curates four
times a year, so that no doubt should exist in the minds
of the parishioners. This the curates had failed to do,
and had caused their parishioners heavy legal expenses
in disputing demands for tithes. One man was known
to have spent as much as £100 in his own defence.
The committee suggested that the whole question
should be referred to the Bishop of London, and that
a translation of the Bull should be exhibited in every
church. The citizens were the more aggrieved because
many parsonages and vicarages were let to ferm.<note place="foot"><p>A list of these, comprising seven churches, was submitted to the
Court of Aldermen, 23 Feb., 1528.&mdash;Repertory 8, fo. 21.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The curates' book of articles.</note>

<p>The curates made their defence in a book of
eighteen articles touching tithes and other oblations,<pb n="385" /><anchor id="Pg385" /><index index="toc" level1="TITHES PAYABLE IN THE CITY." />
the chief point being that every householder, time out
of mind, had been bound to pay to God and the
Church one farthing out of every 10<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> of rent, a half-penny
out of 20<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> and so forth, on 100 days of the
year; amounting in all to 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 1<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> for every 10<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> rent
<hi rend="font-style: italic">per annum</hi>. This manner of payment proving tedious,
the curates and their parishioners came to an agreement
that 1<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> should be paid on every 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>
or noble, and this sum the curates had been receiving
time out of mind, none reclaiming or denying. But,
inasmuch as this payment by occupiers of houses was
only ordained for a "dowry" to the parish churches
of London which had no glebe lands, the curates
demanded that all merchants and artificers, with other
occupiers of the city, should pay personal tithes of
their "lucre or encrece" according to the common
law, and as "well conscyoned" men had been in the
habit of paying in times past.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book O, fos. 140b, 141b.</p></note> The book of articles
was laid before the Court of Common Council on
the 16th February, 1528, by Robert Carter and six
other priests, on behalf of their entire body. On
the following 16th March the Court of Aldermen
for themselves agreed to pay tithe at the forthcoming
Easter according to the Bull of Pope Nicholas, and
not after the rate of 1<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> on the noble,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 8, fo. 27b.</p></note> whilst
four days later the Common Council decided that,
for the sake of convenience, bills should be posted
in every parish church within the city showing
the number of offering days (viz., eighty-two) and
the amount to be offered by inhabitants of the
city.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book O, fos. 145, 145b; Journal 13, fo. 125b.</p></note></p>

<pb n="386" /><anchor id="Pg386" />

<p>So matters continued until, early in 1534, it was
agreed to submit the whole question to the lord
chancellor and other members of the council, who
made their award a few days before Easter.<note place="foot"><p>Letter book P, fos. 31, 34, 41b; Journal 13, fo. 417b.</p></note> It
decreed that at the forthcoming festival every subject
should pay to the parson or curate of his parish after
the rate of 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 9<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> in the pound, and 16 pence
half-penny in the half-pound, and that every man's
wife, servant, child and apprentice receiving the
Holy Sacrament should pay two pence. These payments
were to continue to be paid "without grudge
or murmur" until such time as the council should
arrive at a final settlement.<note place="foot"><p>This order was confirmed by stat. 27, Henry VIII, cap. 21. Ten
years later a decree was made pursuant to stat. 37, Henry VIII,
cap. 12, regulating the whole subject of tithes, but owing to the decree
not having been enrolled in accordance with the terms of the statute,
much litigation has in recent times arisen.&mdash;Burnell, "London (City)
Tithes Act, 1879," Introd., p. 3.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Elsing Spital and Holy Trinity Priory surrendered to the king, 1530-1531.</note>

<p>In the meanwhile the city had been made to
feel the heavy hand of the king and of his new
minister, Thomas Cromwell. In May, 1530, Elsing
Spital, a house established by William Elsing, a
charitable mercer, for the relief of the blind, but
which had subsequently grown into a priory of
Augustinian canons of wealth and position, was confiscated
by the Crown. What became of the blind
inmates is not known. In the following year (1531)
the Priory of Holy Trinity, Aldgate, shared the same
fate. The priory had existed since the time of
Henry I and the "good queen" Matilda,<note place="foot"><p>The well-known and somewhat romantic account of the origin of
the priory and of its connection with the city cnihten-guild is given in
Letter Book C, fos. 134b, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi>; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Liber Dunthorn, fo. 79.</p></note> and its
prior enjoyed the singular distinction of being <hi rend="font-style: italic">ex<pb n="387" /><anchor id="Pg387" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE GREAT BEAM." />
officio</hi> an alderman of the city. The canons were
now removed to another place and the building and
site bestowed by Henry upon his chancellor, Sir
Thomas Audley.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron. (Camd. Soc., No. 53), p. 35. Three years later
(30 March, 1534) the Court of Aldermen resolved to wait upon the
chancellor "to know his mind for the office concerning the lands"
belonging to the late priory.&mdash;Repertory 9, fo. 53b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Great Beam reconveyed to the City after the lapse of ten years, 1531.</note>

<p>Between 1531 and 1534 the City enjoyed some
respite from attack. It even recovered some of its
lost privileges. In 1521 Henry had deprived the
City of its right to the Great Beam, and of the issues
and profits derived from it, and had caused a conveyance
of it to be made to Sir William Sidney.
In 1531 the beam was re-conveyed to the City.<note place="foot"><p>By letters patent dated 13 April, 1531 (preserved at the Guildhall,
Box No. 16).</p></note> The
Grocers' Company were scarcely less interested in
the beam than the City, for to them was deputed the
choice of weighers, who were afterwards admitted
and sworn before the Court of Aldermen. Both the
City and the company used their best endeavours to
recover their lost rights, the former going so far as
to sanction the distribution of the sum of £23 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>
between the king's sergeant, the king's attorney, and
one "Lumnore,"<note place="foot"><p>Henry Lumnore, Lumnar or Lomner, a grocer by guild as well as
calling (see Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. iii,
pt. ii, p. 879), was associated with Sidney in holding the beam. The
City offered to buy him out either by bestowing on him an annuity of
£10 during the joint lives of himself and Sidney, or else by paying him
a lump sum of £100.&mdash;Repertory 8, fo. 218b.</p></note> a servant of "my lady Anne,"<note place="foot"><p>Anne Boleyn.</p></note> with
the view of gaining their object the easier.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 8, fo. 131.</p></note> A compromise
was subsequently effected by which Sir
William Sidney continued to hold the beam at an
annual rent payable to the City,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 142b. 202b.</p></note> until, in 1531, he<pb n="388" /><anchor id="Pg388" />
consented to a surrender, and it became again vested
in the Corporation.</p>

<note place="margin">Feeling in the city at Henry's marriage with Anne Boleyn, 1533.</note>

<p>Finding it hopeless to obtain the Pope's sanction
to his divorce from Catherine, Henry at last lost
all patience, and on the 25th January, 1533, was
privately married to Anne Boleyn. The match was
unpopular with the citizens, who took occasion of a
sermon preached on Easter-day to show their dissatisfaction.
According to Chapuys, the Spanish
ambassador, who sent an account of the affair to the
emperor, the greater part of the congregation got up
and left the church when prayers were desired for the
queen. When Henry heard of the insult thus offered
to his new bride he was furious, and forthwith sent
word to the mayor to see that no such manifestation
should occur again. Thereupon, continues Chapuys,
the mayor summoned the guilds to assemble in their
various halls and commanded them to cease murmuring
against the king's marriage on pain of
incurring the royal displeasure, and to order their
own journeymen and servants, "and, a still more
difficult task, their own wives," to refrain from
speaking disparagingly about the queen.<note place="foot"><p>Chapuys to the emperor.&mdash;Cal. State Papers (Spanish), vol. iv.,
pt. ii, p. 646.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The queen's passage from the Tower to Westminster, 31 May, 1533.</note>

<p>It was perhaps on this account that the civic
authorities excelled themselves in giving the queen a
suitable reception as she passed from the Tower to
Westminster on the 31st May. The Court of Aldermen
directed (14 May) the wardens of the Haberdashers
to prepare their barge as well as the "bachelers"
barge for the occasion. Three pageants were to be
set up, one in Leadenhall and the others at the<pb n="389" /><anchor id="Pg389" /><index index="toc" level1="ANNE BOLEYN AND THE CITY." />
Standard and the little Conduit in Cheapside. The
Standard was to run with wine. A deputation was
appointed to wait upon the king's council to learn its
wishes, and enquiry was to be made of the Duke of
Norfolk whether the clergy should take part in the
day's proceedings, and whether the merchants of the
Steelyard or other strangers should be allowed to
erect pageants.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 9, fo. 1b. There is a fine drawing at Berlin by
Holbein which is thought to be the original design for the triumphal
arch erected by the merchants of the Steelyard on this occasion.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City's gift of 1,000 marks.</note>

<p>The Court of Common Council had on the previous
day (13 May) voted a gift of 1,000 marks to
be presented to the queen at her coronation, and a
further sum to be expended in the city "for the honor
of the same."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 13, fo. 371b. According to Wriothesley (Camd. Soc.,
N.S., No. 11, p. 19) the present to the queen was made to her in a
purse of cloth of gold on the occasion of her passing through the city
on the 31st May, the day before her coronation.</p></note> Catherine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn
were the only queens of king Henry VIII who were
crowned, and on both occasions the citizens of London
performed the customary services.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fo. 70b; Repertory 9, fo. 2.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Act of Succession, 1534.</note>

<p>In September (1533) Anne gave birth to a
daughter, who afterwards ascended the throne as
Queen Elizabeth. In the following spring (1534)
parliament passed an Act of Succession, which not
only declared Elizabeth (and not Mary, the king's
daughter by Catherine of Aragon) heir to the crown,
but required all subjects to take an oath acknowledging
the succession. Commissioners were appointed
to tender the oath to the citizens,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book P, fos. 37-37b; Journal 13, fo. 408b.</p></note> and by the 20th
April the "most part of the city was sworn to the<pb n="390" /><anchor id="Pg390" />
"king and his legitimate issue by the queen's grace
now had and hereafter to come."<note place="foot"><p>Letter to Lord Lisle.&mdash;Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom.
(Henry VIII), vol. vii, p. 208.</p></note> A fortnight later
deeds under the common seals of the livery companies
"concernyng the suretye state and succession" of
the king were delivered to Henry in person at Greenwich
by a deputation of aldermen.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 9, fo. 57b. "Allso the same day [20 April] all the
craftes in London were called to their halls, and there were sworne on
a booke to be true to Queene Anne and to believe and take her for lawfull
wife of the Kinge and rightfull Queene of Englande, and utterlie
to thincke the Lady Marie, daughter to the Kinge by Queene Katherin,
but as a bastarde, and thus to doe without any scrupulositie of conscience."&mdash;Wriothesley's
Chron., i, 24.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proceedings against those objecting to subscribe to the Act of Succession.</note>

<p>The oath, nevertheless, met with much opposition,
more especially among the clergy and the religious
orders. Elizabeth Barton, known as the "holy maid
of Kent," and some of her followers, among them
being Henry Gold, rector of the church of St. Mary
Aldermary, were executed at Tyburn for daring to
speak against the king's marriage.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 37. In November of the last year they had
been made to do penance at Paul's Cross and afterwards at Canterbury.</p></note> The friars proved
extremely obstinate, and Henry sent commissioners
to seek out and suppress all those friaries that refused
to submit.</p>

<note place="margin">The monks of the Charterhouse, 1534-1535.</note>

<p>The inmates of the London Charterhouse, who
might well have been left to enjoy their quiet seclusion
from the world, were startled by a visit from the king's
commissioners calling upon them to take the oath.
The manner of their reception by John Houghton,
the prior, and his brethren and subsequent proceedings
are graphically described by Maurice Chauncy,<note place="foot"><p>"Historia aliquot nostri sæculi martyrum," 1583.  Much of it is
quoted by Father Gasquet in his work on "Henry VIII and the
English Monasteries" (cap. vi), and also by Mr. Froude ("Hist. of
England," vol. ii, cap. ix).</p></note> one<pb n="391" /><anchor id="Pg391" /><index index="toc" level1="THE COMMISSIONERS AND THE CHARTERHOUSE." />
of the inmates, who was more compliant than his
brethren to the king's wishes, and thereby saved his
life. The prior and Humphrey Middlemore, the procurator
of the convent, were committed to the Tower
for counselling opposition to the commissioners. There
they were visited by the Archbishop of York and the
Bishop of London, who persuaded them at last that
the question of the succession was not a cause in
which to sacrifice their lives for conscience sake. The
result was that after a while Houghton and his companion
declared their willingness to submit. On the
29th May the commissioners received oaths of fealty
from Prior Houghton and five other monks, and on
the 6th June Bishop Lee and Sir Thomas Kitson,
one of the sheriffs, received similar oaths from a
number of priests, professed monks and lay brethren
or <hi rend="font-style: italic">conversi</hi> belonging to the house.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. vii,
p. 283.</p></note> The oaths of
obedience to the Act were given under reservation
"so far as the law of God permitted," and for a time
the monks were left in comparative quiet, some few
of them, of whom Cromwell entertained the most
hope of submission, being sent, by his direction, to
the convent of Sion.<note place="foot"><p>This convent&mdash;the most virtuous house of religion in England&mdash;was
of the Order of St. Bridget, and received an annual visit from the
mayor and aldermen of the City of London at what was known as
"the pardon time of Sion," in the month of August. In return for
the hospitality bestowed by the lady abbess on these occasions the
Court of Aldermen occasionally made her presents of wine (Repertories
3, fo. 94b; 7, fo. 275). In 1517 the court instructed the chamberlain
to avoid excess of diet on the customary visit. There was to be no
breakfast on the barge and no swans at dinner (Repertory 3, fo. 154b).
In 1825 the Court of Common Council decreed (<hi rend="font-style: italic">inter alia</hi>) that "as
tonchyng the goyng of my lord mayre and my masters his brethern
the aldermen [to] Syon, yt is sett at large and to be in case as it was
before the Restreynt" (Journal 12, fo. 302). It was suppressed
25 Nov., 1539.&mdash;Wriothesley's Chron., i, 109.</p></note></p>

<pb n="392" /><anchor id="Pg392" />

<note place="margin">The Act of Supremacy, 1534.</note>

<note place="margin">Execution of Houghton and others, 1535.</note>

<p>The exhortations of the "father confessor" were
not without some measure of success, several of the
Carthusians being induced to alter their opinions as to
the king's demands. The seal of doom, however, was
fixed on the order by the passing of the Act which called
upon its members to renounce the Pope and acknowledge
the royal supremacy.<note place="foot"><p>The Act of Supremacy was passed in 1534, but the king's new
title as Supreme Head of the Church was not incorporated in his style
before the 15 Jan., 1535.</p></note> Fisher and More denied
the king's title of Supreme Head of the Church, and
were committed to the Tower. At this crisis there
came to London two priors of Carthusian houses
established, one in Nottinghamshire and the other
in Lincolnshire. They came to talk over the
state of affairs with Houghton. An interview
with Cromwell, recently appointed vicar-general
or king's vicegerent in matters ecclesiastical, was
resolved on. The king might possibly be prevailed
upon to make some abatement in his demands.
Cromwell, however, no sooner discovered the object
of their visit than he committed them to the Tower
as rebels and would-be traitors. As they still refused
to acknowledge the king's supremacy in the Church,
in spite of all efforts of persuasion, they were brought
to trial, together with Father Reynolds of Sion, on a
charge of treason. A verdict of guilty was, after some
hesitation on the part of the jury, found against them,
and they were executed at Tyburn (4 May, 1535),
glorying in the cause for which they were held worthy
to suffer death. Houghton's arm was suspended over
the gateway of the London Charterhouse, in the fond
hope that the rest of the brethren might be awed
into submission. This atrocious act of barbarism had,<pb n="393" /><anchor id="Pg393" /><index index="toc" level1="EXECUTION OF FISHER AND MORE." />
however, precisely the opposite effect to that desired.
The monks were more resolute than ever not to
submit, and not even a personal visit of Henry himself
could turn them from their purpose.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. viii,
p. 321.</p></note> Three of
them were thereupon committed to prison, where
they were compelled to stand in an upright position
for thirteen days, chained from their necks to their arms
and with their legs fettered.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 354.</p></note> They were afterwards
brought to trial on a charge of treason, convicted and
executed (19 June).</p>

<p>The fate of the remaining monks is soon told.
In May, 1537, the royal commissioners once more
attended at the Charterhouse, when they found
the majority of its inmates prepared to take the oath
prescribed. Ten of them, however, still refused, and
were committed to Newgate and there left to be
"dispatched by the hand of God," in other words to
meet a painful and lingering death from fever and
starvation. The following month the remnant of the
community made their submission, and the London
Charterhouse, as a monastic institution, ceased to
exist.</p>

<note place="margin">Execution of Fisher and More, 1535.</note>

<p>Fisher and More were now brought from the
Tower, where they had lain six months and more,
and convicted on a similar charge of treason. Their
sentence was commuted to death by beheading. Fisher
was the first to suffer (19 June, 1535). His head was
set up on London Bridge and his body buried in the
churchyard of All Hallows, Barking. More suffered
a few weeks later (6 July). His head, too, was placed
on London Bridge, but his body was buried in the<pb n="394" /><anchor id="Pg394" />
Tower, whither the remains of Fisher were afterwards
carried. On the 15th December the Court of Aldermen
publicly condemned a sermon preached by Fisher
"in derogation and diminution of the royal estate of
the king's majesty."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 9, fo. 145.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Pilgrimage of Grace, 1536.</note>

<p>When, in the following year (1536), the smaller
monasteries&mdash;those of less than £200 a year&mdash;were
dissolved by Act of Parliament, and the inhabitants
of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, taking fright lest the
king and Cromwell should proceed to despoil the
parish churches, set out on the Pilgrimage of Grace,
Henry sought the City's aid. On the 10th October a
letter from the king was read before the Court of
Aldermen, desiring them to dispatch forthwith to his
manor of Ampthill, where the nobles were about to
wait upon his majesty, a contingent of at least 250
armed men, 200 of which were to be well horsed, and
100 to be archers.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 199.</p></note> The mayor, Sir John Allen,<note place="foot"><p>He had been elected mayor for the second time in October last (1535),
much against his own wish, at the king's express desire.&mdash;Journal 13,
fo. 452b; Wriothesley, i, 31. He presented the City with a collar of SS.
to be worn by the mayor for the time being.&mdash;Repertory 11, fo. 238.</p></note> lost no
time in issuing his precept to the livery companies for
each of them to furnish a certain number of bowmen
and billmen, well horsed and arrayed in jackets of
white bearing the City's arms. They were to muster
in Moorfields within twenty-four hours. The Mercers
were called upon to furnish the largest quota, viz.,
twenty men; the Grocers, Drapers, Tailors and Cloth-workers
respectively, sixteen men, and the rest of the
companies contingents varying from twelve to two.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 9, fos. 199, 199b.</p></note>
The Court of Aldermen at the same time took<pb n="395" /><anchor id="Pg395" /><index index="toc" level1="THE PILGRIMAGE OF GRACE." />
the precaution of depriving all priests and curates, as
well as all friars dwelling within the city, of every
offensive weapon, so that they should be left with
nothing but their "meate knyves."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 9, fo. 200.</p></note> The king sent
a letter of thanks for the city's contingent.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 200b.</p></note></p>

<p>Later on, when Allen had been succeeded in the
mayoralty by Sir Ralph Warren,<note place="foot"><p>Son of Thomas Warren, fuller; grandson of William Warren, of
Fering, co. Sussex. He was knighted on the day that his election was
confirmed by the king (Wriothesley. i, 59). His daughter Joan (by his
second wife Joan, daughter of John Lake, of London) married Sir Henry
Williams, <hi rend="font-style: italic">alias</hi> Cromwell (Repertory 14, fo. 180; Journal 17. fo. 137b), by
whom she had issue Robert Cromwell, father of the Protector. Warren
died 11 July, 1533, and his widow married Alderman Sir Thomas White.&mdash;See
notes to Machyn's Diary, p. 330.</p></note> it was resolved that
each member of the court should provide at his own
cost and charges twenty able men fully equipped in
case of any emergency that might arise, whilst the
companies were again called upon to hold men in
readiness.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 9, fo. 209b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Henry's marriage with Jane Seymour, May, 1536.</note>

<p>Henry in the meantime had got rid of his second
wife on the specious ground of her having misconducted
herself with more than one member of the
court, the real cause being her miscarriage<note place="foot"><p>Henry attributed her miscarriage to licentiousness; others to her
having received a shock at seeing her royal husband thrown from his
horse whilst tilting at the ring.&mdash;Wriothesley, i, 33.</p></note> of a male
child, to the king's bitter disappointment. Henry had
made up his mind to change his wives until he could
find one who would give him a male heir and thus
place the succession to the crown beyond all possibility
of doubt. The very next day following Anne
Boleyn's execution he married Jane Seymour. The
marriage necessitated the calling together of a
new parliament, when a fresh Act was passed settling<pb n="396" /><anchor id="Pg396" />
the succession on Jane's children and declaring
both Mary and Elizabeth illegitimate. Nevertheless,
as soon as Mary made formal submission to her
father, the king's attitude towards her, from being
cold and cruel, changed at once to one of courtesy if
not of affection. He was thought to entertain the
idea of declaring her heir-apparent. Indeed, on
Sunday, the 20th August, she was actually proclaimed
as such in one of the London churches&mdash;no doubt by
some mistake.<note place="foot"><p>Chapuys to [Granvelle] 25 Aug., 1536.&mdash;Cal. Letters and Papers
For. and Dom. (Henry VIII), vol. xi., p. 145.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Convocation at St. Paul's, 9 June-20 July, 1536.</note>

<p>Whilst parliament was sitting at Westminster
convocation was gathered at St. Paul's in the city,
and continued to sit there until the 20th July, presided
over by Cromwell as the king's vicar-general. The
meeting was remarkable for its formal decree that
Henry, as supreme head of the Church, might and
ought to disregard all citations by the Pope, as well
as for the promulgation of the ten articles intended
to promote uniformity of belief and worship.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 52-53.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Preparation for the new queen's coronation.</note>

<note place="margin">She dies in childbed, 24 Oct., 1537.</note>

<p>In September, 1536, the Court of Common
Council agreed to vote the same sum of money for
the coronation of the "right excellent pryncesse lady
Jane, quene of Englonde," as had been granted at the
coronation of "dame Anne, late queene of Englonde."<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book P, fo. 103b.</p></note>
The money, however, was not required, for the new
queen was never crowned. Just one week after the
birth of a prince (12 Oct., 1537), afterwards King
Edward VI, there was a solemn procession of priests
from every city church, with the Bishop of London,
the choir of St. Paul's, the mayor, aldermen and<pb n="397" /><anchor id="Pg397" /><index index="toc" level1="JANE SEYMOUR&mdash;ANNE OF CLEVES." />
crafts in their liveries, for the preservation of the
infant prince and for the health of the queen, who lay
in a precarious state.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 69.</p></note> A few days later (24 Oct.) she
was dead. The citizens caused her obit to be
celebrated in St. Paul's with truly regal pomp.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book P, fo. 135b; Wriothesley, i, 71, 72.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Anne of Cleves arrives at Dover, 27 Dec., 1539.</note>

<note place="margin">Her passage through the city, 4 Feb,. 1540.</note>

<p>Two years later the citizens were preparing to
set out to Greenwich in their barge (the mayor,
aldermen, and those who had served the office of
sheriff, in liveries of black velvet with chains of gold
on their necks, accompanied by their servants in
coats of russet) to welcome Anne of Cleves, who
landed at Dover the 27th December, 1539.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 10, fos. 152b, 153; Wriothesley, i, 109, 111.</p></note> On the
3rd February, 1540, the Court of Aldermen was
informed that the king and queen would be leaving
Greenwich on the morrow for Westminster, and that
it was the king's wish that the commons of London
should be in their best apparel, in their barges, to
wait upon his highness, meeting at St. Dunstan's in
the East at 7 o'clock in the morning and arriving at
Greenwich by 8 o'clock.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 10, fo. 161. The circumstance that Henry carried his
new bride to Westminster by water instead of conducting her thither
through the streets of the city has been considered a proof of his want
of regard for her.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Cromwell's work of demolition in the city, 1537-1538.</note>

<p>The insurrection which had taken place in the
country under the name of the Pilgrimage of Grace
was seized by the king as an excuse for suppressing
many of the larger monasteries and confiscating their
property. He had no such excuse for carrying out
his destructive policy in the city. Nevertheless, under
the immediate supervision of Cromwell, the work of
suppression went on, and before the end of 1538 was<pb n="398" /><anchor id="Pg398" />
well nigh complete. The surrender of the houses of
the Black Friars, the Grey Friars and the White
Friars followed in quick succession, "and so all the
other immediatlie."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii. 807.</p></note> Cromwell by this time had
removed from his house near Fenchurch to another
near the Austin Friars in Throgmorton Street.
He had recently asked for a pipe of water to be
laid on to his new house, and this the Common
Council had "lovingly" granted.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book P, fo. 113; Journal 14, fo. 30b.</p></note> In his private
concerns he showed as little regard for the rights
of others as in the affairs of State. He did not
scruple to remove bodily a small house, the property
of Stow's father, in order to enlarge his own garden,
giving neither warning beforehand nor explanation
afterwards, and "no man durst go to argue the
matter."<note place="foot"><p>Stow's "Survey" (Thoms's ed., 1876), p. 68.</p></note></p>

<p>The hospital of St. Thomas of Acon, which had
ministered to the wants of the poorer citizens for
nearly 400 years, disappeared,<note place="foot"><p>The Mercers' Company applied for a grant of the chapel and
other property of the hospital; and this was conceded by letters patent,
21 April, 1542, upon payment of the sum of £969 17<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 6<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, subject to
a reserved rent of £7 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 10<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>, which was redeemed by the company in
1560.&mdash;Livery Comp. Com. (1880), Append. to Report, 1884, vol. ii, p. 9.</p></note> and was soon followed
by the priory and hospital of St. Bartholomew, an
institution of even greater antiquity, the hospital of
St. Thomas, in Southwark, the priory and hospital of
St. Mary without Bishopsgate, known as St. Mary of
Bethlem, or "Bedlam," and the Abbey of Graces or
New Abbey (sometimes called the Eastminster to
distinguish it from the other minster in the west of
London) which had been founded by Edward III,
near Tower Hill.</p>

<pb n="399" /><anchor id="Pg399" /><index index="toc" level1="THE DISSOLUTION OF RELIGIOUS HOUSES." />

<note place="margin">The division of the spoil.</note>

<p>A portion of the spoil was, as we have already
seen, distributed among court favourites. The site of
the house and gardens of the Augustinian Friars in
Broad Street Ward was occupied, soon after their
suppression (12 Nov., 1538), by the mansion-house of
that politic courtier the celebrated Marquis of Winchester,
who managed to maintain himself in high
station in spite of the changes which took place
under the several reigns of Henry VIII, Edward VI,
Mary, and Elizabeth, "by being a willow and not an
oak." The building known at the present day as
Winchester House, in Broad Street, stands near the
site of the old mansion-house and garden of William
Paulet, first Marquis of Winchester. The Friars'
church he allowed to stand; and in June, 1550, the
nave was granted, by virtue of a charter permitting
alien non-conforming churches to exist in this country,
to the Dutch and Walloon churches.<note place="foot"><p>On the re-establishment of the Dutch or Mother Strangers'
Church, at Elizabeth's accession, it was declared by the Privy Council to
be under the superintendence of the Bishop of London (Cal. State Papers
Dom., Feb., 1560). Hence it was that Dr. Temple, Bishop of London,
was memorialised in March, 1888, as superintendent of the French
Church in London.&mdash;See "Eng. Hist. Review," April, 1891, pp. 388-389.</p></note> The first marquis
dying in 1571, he was succeeded by his son, who sold
the monuments and lead from the roof of the remaining
portion of the church and turned the place into
a stable.<note place="foot"><p>Stow's "Survey" (Thoms's ed., 1876), p. 67.</p></note> The fourth marquis was reduced to parting
with his house, built on the site of the old priory, in
order to pay his debts, and appears to have found a
purchaser in a wealthy London merchant and alderman
of the city, John Swinnerton or Swynarton.<note place="foot"><p>Nichols' "Progresses of Queen Eliz.," iii. 598. For particulars of
Swinnerton see Clode's "Early Hist. of the Merchant Taylors' Company,"
i, 262, etc.</p></note></p>

<pb n="400" /><anchor id="Pg400" />

<note place="margin">The mayor's effort to save the destruction of the steeple of the Austin Friars Church.</note>

<p>The steeple of the church, which was of so great
beauty that the citizens desired its preservation,<note place="foot"><p>Strype's Stow, bk. ii, pp. 114, 115.</p></note> was
sold by the marquis to Henry Robinson, who forthwith
set to work to pull it down on the ground that
it was in such a state of decay as to be a danger to
the passer-by. Swinnerton, who happened to be
mayor at the time, ordered him to stay the work of
demolition; he, however, not only hurried on the
more, but obstructed the officers sent to put a stop to
the work, for which he was committed to Newgate to
stay there until he gave security for restoring what he had
already pulled down. The thought suggests itself that
the fact of Swinnerton having purchased adjacent property
may have made him the more zealous in preventing
the demolition of the steeple than perhaps he might
otherwise have been. However that may be, he lost
no time in informing the lords of the council of the
state of affairs and asking their advice (16 Feb.,
1612). The reply came three days later, and was to
the effect that as the City had had the option of
purchasing the steeple at even a less price than
Robinson had paid for it, and might have come to
some arrangement with the marquis to keep it in
repair, it could not prevent Robinson, who purchased
it as a speculation, making the best he could of his
bargain; so that, unless the City consented to accept
Robinson's offer to part with his property on payment
of his purchase-money and disbursements within a
fortnight, down the steeple must come.<note place="foot"><p>Remembrancia (Analytical Index), pp. 133, 134.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The priory of St. Helen without Bishopsgate.</note>

<p>The priory of St. Helen without Bishopsgate
was one of the last to be surrendered. In 1542 the<pb n="401" /><anchor id="Pg401" /><index index="toc" level1="RELIGIOUS HOUSES FOSTERED BY THE CITY." />
nuns' chapel, which at one time was partitioned off
from the rest of the church, was made over to Sir
Richard Williams, a nephew of Thomas Cromwell,
and ancestor of the Protector. The nuns' refectory or
hall passed into the hands of the Leathersellers' Company
and formed the company's hall until the close
of the last century. The conduct of the inmates of
the priory had not always been what it should be.<note place="foot"><p>In 1439 Reginald Kentwode, Dean of St. Paul's, having in a
recent visitation discovered "many defaults and excesses," drew up a
schedule of injunctions for their better regulation.&mdash;Printed in London
and Middlesex Archæol. Soc. Transactions, ii, 200-203.</p></note>
The last prioress, in anticipation of the coming storm,
leased a large portion of the conventual property to
members of her own family, and at the time of the
suppression was herself allowed a gratuity of £30
and a pension.</p>

<note place="margin">Friendly relations between the Corporation and
religious houses in the city.</note>

<p>The relations existing between the civic authorities
and the religious houses in the city were often of
a most friendly and cordial character. When, in 1520,
the Friars of the Holy Cross wanted assistance for
the maintenance and building of their church, they
applied to the Corporation as being their "secund
founders."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 12, fo. 75.</p></note> For assistance thus given the friars
bound themselves to pray for their benefactors.
When, in 1512, the master of St. Bartholomew's
hospital obtained a lease for ninety-nine years from
the City of a parcel of land on which his gatehouse
or porch stood, it was on condition of payment of a
certain rent and of his keeping a yearly obit in his
church for the souls of the mayor, aldermen and
commons of the city; and when the master of the
hospital, two years later, attempted to back out of<pb n="402" /><anchor id="Pg402" />
the terms of his lease and asked to be discharged
from keeping the obit on the ground that he thought
that the payment of the specified rent was sufficient
for the premises, the Court of Aldermen unanimously
decided that no part of the agreement should be
minished or remitted.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fo. 185b.</p></note> When the house of the
Sisters Minoresses or Poor Clares, situate in Aldgate,
suffered from fire, the Corporation rendered them
pecuniary aid to the extent of 300 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 5, fos. 15, 15b, 82b.</p></note></p>

<p>It was, however, to the Franciscans or Grey Friars
that the citizens of London, individually as well as in
their corporate capacity, were more especially attached.
Soon after their arrival in England in 1223, they
became indebted to the benevolence and generosity
of citizens, their first benefactor having been John
Ewen, citizen and mercer, who made them a gift of
some land and houses in the parish of St. Nicholas
by the Shambles. Upon this they erected their
original building. Their first chapel, which became
the chapel of their church, was built at the cost of
William Joyner, who was mayor in 1239; the nave
was added by Henry Waleys, who was frequently
mayor during the reign of Edward I; the chapterhouse
by Walter le Poter, elected sheriff in 1272; the
dormitory by Gregory de Rokesley, who was mayor
from 1274 to 1281, and again in 1284-5, and whose
bones eventually found a resting place in their church;
the refectory by another citizen, Bartholomew de
Castro; and lastly&mdash;coming to later times&mdash;a library
was added to their house by the bounty of Richard
Whitington, as already narrated. It became the custom
for the mayor and aldermen, as patron and<pb n="403" /><anchor id="Pg403" /><index index="toc" level1="INSTITUTION OF PARISH REGISTERS." />
founders, to pay a yearly visit to their house and
church on St. Francis's day (4 Oct.). The custom
dates from 1508. In 1522 the visit was for the first
time followed by a dinner.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 2, fo. 185; Grey Friars Chron., pp. 29, 31.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Royal injunction for keeping Parish Registers, 29 Sept., 1538.</note>

<p>In one respect at least, if in no other, Cromwell's
action in suppressing religious houses resulted in a
benefit to the city of London as well as to the country
at large, and this was in the institution of parish
registers, not only for baptisms, but also for marriages.
It had been his intention to establish them in 1536 to
remedy the inconvenience to the public arising
from the suppression of the smaller monasteries,
and it is evident that some instructions were given at
this time, inasmuch as the registers of two city parishes&mdash;viz.,
St. James Garlickhithe and St. Mary Bothaw&mdash;commence
in November of this year,<note place="foot"><p>Sixteen other registers for city parishes commence in 1538, and
four in 1539.&mdash;See Paper on St. James Garlickhithe, by W. D. Cooper,
F.S.A. (London and Middlesex Arch. Soc. Trans., vol. iii, p. 392, note).</p></note> although
the royal injunction commanding that registers should
systematically be kept up, under penalty of fines, was
not published by Cromwell, as vicar-general, until the
29th September, 1538. The delay is to be accounted
for by the great discontent which the rumour of his
project excited in the country. It was reported that
some new tax on the services of the Church was contemplated,
and the first in the list of popular grievances
circulated by the rebels in the Pilgrimage of Grace
was the payment of tribute to the king for the
sacrament of baptism. In course of time, as matters
became quieter and the government began to feel its
own strength, Cromwell resumed a project never altogether
abandoned, and caused the injunction to be<pb n="404" /><anchor id="Pg404" />
issued, an action for which posterity must ever be
deeply grateful.</p>

<note place="margin">Great increase of London poor, consequent on the suppression of religious houses.</note>

<p>On the other hand, the sudden closing of these
institutions caused the streets to be thronged with the
sick and poor, and the small parish churches to be so
crowded with those who had been accustomed to frequent
the larger and more commodious churches of
the friars that there was scarce room left for the
parishioners themselves. The city authorities saw at
once that something would have to be done if they
wished to keep their streets clear of beggars and of
invalids, and not invite the spread of sickness by
allowing infected persons to wander at large. As a
means of affording temporary relief, collections for the
poor were made every Sunday at Paul's Cross, after
the sermon, and the proceeds were distributed weekly
among the most necessitous,<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley's Chron. (Camd. Soc, N.S., No. 11), i, 77, 78.</p></note> but more comprehensive
steps were required to be taken.</p>

<note place="margin">Sir Richard Gresham's letter to the king for conveyance to the City of certain hospitals.</note>

<p>Sir Richard Gresham,<note place="foot"><p>Descended from a Norfolk family. Apprenticed to John Middleton,
mercer, of London, and admitted to the freedom of the Mercers'
Company in 1507. Alderman of Walbrook and Cheap Wards
successively. Sheriff 1531-2. Married (1) Audrey, daughter of William
Lynne, of Southwick, co. Northampton, (2) Isabella Taverson, <hi rend="font-style: italic">née</hi>
Worpfall. Was the father of Sir Thomas Gresham, the founder of the
Royal Exchange and of the college which bears his name.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ob.</hi>, 21 Feb.,
1549. Buried in the church of St. Laurence Jewry.</p></note> who was mayor at the
time (1537-8), took upon himself to address a letter<note place="foot"><p>Cott. MS., Cleop. E., iv, fo. 222.&mdash;Printed in Burgon's "Life of
Gresham," i, 26-29.</p></note>
to the king setting forth that there were three hospitals
in the city, viz., St. Mary's Spital, St. Bartholomew's
and St. Thomas's, besides the New Abbey on Tower
Hill&mdash;institutions primarily founded "onely for the
releffe, comforte and helpyng of pore and impotent<pb n="405" /><anchor id="Pg405" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE DISSOLVED HOUSES." />
people not beyng able to helpe theymselffes; and
not to the mayntenannce of Chanons, Preests, and
Monks to lyve in pleasure, nothyng regardyng the
miserable people liyng in every strete, offendyng
every clene person passyng by the way with theyre
fylthy and nasty savours"&mdash;and asking that the
mayor and aldermen of the city for the time being
might have the order and disposition of the hospitals
mentioned, and of all the lands, tenements and revenues
appertaining to the same. If his grace would but
grant this request the mayor promised that a great
number of the indigent sick would be relieved, whilst
"sturdy beggars" not willing to work would be
punished.</p>

<note place="margin">Two petitions from the City, Mar., 1539.</note>

<note place="margin">The City offers to purchase certain dissolved houses, 1 Aug., 1540.</note>

<p>In March, 1539, the City presented two petitions
to the king, one desiring that the late dissolved houses
might be made over to them, together with their rents
and revenues, in order that relief might be provided for
the sick and needy, and the other asking that Henry
would be pleased to convey to them the churches of the
late four orders of friars, together with their lands and
tenements, so that the mayor and citizens might take
order for the due performance of divine service therein
to the glory of God and the honour of the king.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 14, fo. 129; Letter Book P, fo. 178.</p></note>
These petitions having been either refused or ignored,
the Court of Common Council, on the 1st August,
1540, authorised the mayor and aldermen to make
diligent suit to the king for the purchase of the houses,
churches, and cloisters of the dissolved friars, and to
make an offer of 1,000 marks for them "yf thei can
be gotten no better chepe."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 14, fo. 216b; Letter Book P, fo. 220b.</p></note> Henry upbraided the<pb n="406" /><anchor id="Pg406" />
City for being "pynche pence" or stingy in their
offer,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 10, fo. 200.</p></note> but as no better offer was made the matter was
allowed to stand over, and nothing was done for four
years.</p>

<note place="margin">The City in difficulties with king and parliament, 1541-1542.</note>

<p>Henry meanwhile took the opportunity afforded
him by a full treasury, which rendered him independent
of the favour of the citizens, of robbing them of
their right of measuring linen-cloth and other commodities,
and conferring the same by letters patent
on John Godsalve, one of the clerks of the signet.
The City's right was incontestable, and had been
admitted by the king's chancellor, as well as by the
Chancellor of the Court of Fruits and Tenths (a court
recently established), and the mayor and aldermen
represented the facts of the case to the king himself
by letter, dated the 21st July, 1541.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 14, fo. 269.</p></note> Another
"variance" occurred about this time between the City
and the Crown touching the office and duties of the
City's waterbailiff.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 129.</p></note></p>

<p>Again, in the spring of 1542, an incident occurred
which caused the relations between parliament and
the City to be somewhat strained. The sheriffs of
that year&mdash;Rowland Hill,<note place="foot"><p>Son of Thomas Hill, of Hodnet, co. Salop. He devoted large
sums of money to building causeways and bridges, and erected a
grammar school at Drayton-in-Hales, otherwise Market Drayton, in his
native county, which he endowed by will, dated 6 April, 1551 (Cal. of
Wills, Court of Hust., London, part ii, p. 651). See also Holinshed,
iii, 1021.</p></note> an ancestor of the founder
of the Penny Post, and Henry Suckley&mdash;had thought
fit to obstruct the sergeant-at-mace in the execution
of his duty, whilst attempting to remove a
prisoner, who was a member of parliament, from<pb n="407" /><anchor id="Pg407" /><index index="toc" level1="PRECAUTIONS AGAINST INFECTIOUS DISEASES." />
one of the compters. The arrest of a member
of parliament has always been a hazardous operation,
and the sheriffs after a time thought better of it and
gave up their prisoner. The Speaker, nevertheless,
summoned them to appear at the Bar of the House
and finally committed them to the Tower. They
were released after two or three days, however, at
the humble suit of the mayor.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 824; Wriothesley, i, 135. According to the Grey
Friars Chron. (p. 45), it was the sergeant-at-arms himself whom the
sheriffs detained.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Precautions against the spread of pestilence, 1543.</note>

<p>In the following year (1543) the plague returned,
and extra-precautions had to be taken against the
spread of the disease, now that the houses of the
friars were no longer open to receive patients and to
alleviate distress. Besides the usual order that infected
houses should be marked with a cross, the mayor
caused proclamation to be made that persons of independent
means should undergo quarantine for one
month after recovery from sickness, whilst others
whom necessity compelled to walk abroad for their
livelihood were to carry in their hands white rods,
two feet in length, for the space of forty days after
convalescence. Straw and rushes in an infected house
were to be removed to the fields before they were
burnt, and infected clothing was to be carried away
to be aired and not to be hung out of window. The
hard-heartedness engendered by these visitations is
evidenced by the necessity of the mayor having to
enjoin that thenceforth no householder within the
city or liberties should put any person stricken with
the plague out of his house into the street, without
making provision for his being kept in some other<pb n="408" /><anchor id="Pg408" />
house. All dogs other than hounds, spaniels or mastiffs
kept for the purpose of guarding the house were forthwith
to be removed out of the city or killed,
whilst watch-dogs were to be confined to the house.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation dated 13 Aug., 1543.&mdash;Journal 15, fo. 48b.</p></note>
In October the mayor was ordered to resume the
weekly bills of mortality, which of late had been
neglected, in order that the king might be kept informed
as to the increase or decrease of the sickness.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 55; Letter Book Q, fo. 93.</p></note>
The Michaelmas Law Sittings had to be postponed
until the 15th November, and were removed to St.
Albans.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 92b; Grey Friars Chron., p. 45.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Preparation for renewal of war with France, 1544.</note>

<p>Whilst the city was being wasted by disease the
king was preparing for war with France.<note place="foot"><p>Writ to mayor and sheriffs for proclamation of war, dat. 2 Aug.,
1543.&mdash;Journal 15, fo. 46b.</p></note> A joint
expedition by Henry and Charles was to be undertaken
in the following year (1544). A commission
was issued early in the year for raising money in the
city, and the lord chancellor himself, accompanied by
officers of State, came into the city to read it. Finding
that the lord mayor's name appeared third on the
commission instead of being placed at its head, the
chancellor ordered the mistake to be at once rectified
by the town clerk and a new commission to be drawn
up, whilst the rest of the lords agreed that at their
several sessions on the business of this subsidy the
lord mayor should occupy the seat of honour.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 32b.</p></note> By
the end of April the chancellor (Audley) had died.
His successor, Lord Wriothesley, had not long been
appointed before the Court of Aldermen sent a deputation
to desire his lordship's favour and friendship<pb n="409" /><anchor id="Pg409" /><index index="toc" level1="RENEWAL OF WAR WITH FRANCE." />
in the city's affairs, and agreed to make him a present
of a couple of silver-gilt pots to the value of £20
or thereabouts.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 65b.</p></note> On the 24th May the Common
Council agreed to provide a contingent of 500 or 600
men at the discretion of the mayor and aldermen,
the men being raised from the livery companies.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 95; Repertory 11, fo. 74; Letter Book Q, fo. 109.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The re-establishment of St. Bartholomew's hospital, 23 June, 1544.</note>

<p>Just as the king was about to set sail for the
continent, he issued letters patent (23 June, 1544)
re-establishing the hospital of St. Bartholomew on a
new foundation, with the avowed object of providing
"comfort to prisoners, shelter to the poor, visitation
to the sick, food to the hungry, drink to the thirsty,
clothes to the naked, and sepulture to the dead."<note place="foot"><p>"Memoranda ... relating to the Royal Hospitals," 1863,
pp. 4-7.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The campaign in France of 1544.</note>

<p>Henry crossed over to France, leaving the new
queen, Catherine Parr, widow of Lord Latimer, whom
he had recently married, regent of the realm. After
a long siege, lasting from July until September, he
succeeded in taking Boulogne. On Thursday, the 25th
September, an order was received by the Court of
Aldermen from the lord chancellor, on behalf of the
queen regent, to get in readiness another contingent of
500 men well harnessed and weaponed, 100 of whom
were to be archers and the rest billmen. The last
mentioned were to be provided with "blak bylles or
morys pykes." The whole force was to be ready for
shipment to Boulogne by the following Saturday. No
time was to be lost. The wardens of the city
companies were immediately summoned, and each
company was ordered to provide the same number<pb n="410" /><anchor id="Pg410" />
of men as on the last occasion. Each soldier was to
be provided with a coat of grey frieze, with half
sleeves, and a pair of new boots or else "sterte upps."
The Corporation for its part appointed five captains,
to each of whom was given the sum of £10 towards
his apparel and charges, whilst £5 was allowed to
each petty captain. These sums were paid out of the
"goods" of the mayor and commonalty.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 106; Letter Book Q, fo. 116b.</p></note></p>

<p>Scarcely had the city recovered from this drain
upon its population before it was again called upon to
fill up the ranks of the army in France. On Saturday,
the 25th October, the Court of Aldermen was ordered
to raise another force of 500 men by the following
Monday. It was no easy matter to comply with so
sudden a demand. The city companies were called
upon to contribute as before, any deficiency in the
number of men raised by them being made up by
men raised by the mayor and aldermen themselves
in a somewhat novel fashion. The Court of Aldermen
had agreed that each of their number should on
the Saturday night make the round of his ward and
select "fifty, forty, twenty, or ten" tall and comely men,
who should be warned in the king's name to appear
the next morning before seven o'clock at the Guildhall.
On Sunday morning the mayor and aldermen
came to the Guildhall, and took the names of those
whom they had selected over night. Two hundred
men were eventually set apart to make up the
deficiency of those to be provided by the companies.
By six o'clock in the evening the whole contingent of
500 men was thus raised, and at nine o'clock on
Monday morning they mustered at Leadenhall,<pb n="411" /><anchor id="Pg411" /><index index="toc" level1="A BENEVOLENCE RAISED IN THE CITY." />
whence they were conducted by the sheriffs and city
chamberlain to the Tower Hill and handed over to
Sir Thomas Arundel, who complimented the civic
authorities on the appearance of the men, and promised
to commend their diligence to the king.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory, 11, fo. 118b; Letter Book Q, fo. 120b.</p></note> This same
Monday morning (27 Oct.) the mayor received instructions
to see that such carpenters and other
artificers as had been "prested" for the king's
service at Boulogne by the king's master-carpenter
kept their day and presented themselves at the time
and place appointed on pain of death.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 123; Letter Book Q, fo. 119.</p></note> Search was
ordered to be made in the following month for
mariners lurking in the city, and if any were discovered
they were to be forthwith despatched to
the ships awaiting them.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 124; Letter Book Q, fo. 122.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">City gift to the king on his return from France.</note>

<p>By this time the king had ceased to take a
personal part in the campaign and had returned home,
the mayor and aldermen giving him a hearty welcome,
and making him a suitable present in token of
their joy for his return and his success in effecting the
surrender of Boulogne.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 120b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Opposition to a benevolence in the city, 1545.</note>

<p>At the opening of the next year (1545) Henry
demanded another benevolence after the rate of two
shillings in the pound. The lord chancellor and others
of the king's council sat at Baynard's Castle to collect
the benevolence of the city, "callinge all the citizens
of the same before them, begininge first with the
mayor and aldermen."<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 151, 153; Grey Friars Chron., p. 48.</p></note> Richard Rede, alderman of
the ward of Farringdon Without, resisted this demand<pb n="412" /><anchor id="Pg412" />
as unconstitutional, and was promptly despatched to
the king in Scotland, where he was shortly afterwards
made a prisoner of war. Another alderman, Sir
William Roche, of Bassishaw ward, was unfortunate
enough to offend the council and was committed to
the Fleet.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 346.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">William Laxton, mayor, knighted, 8 Feb., 1545.</note>

<p>On the 8th February William Laxton, the mayor,
was presented to the king at Westminster, when
Henry took occasion to thank him and his brother
aldermen for the benevolence they had given him.
He informed them of the success that had recently
attended the English forces under the Earl of
Hertford and the lord admiral, Sir John Dudley,
whom he had left as deputy of Boulogne, and dismissed
them to their homes after conferring upon the
mayor the honour of knighthood.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 151, 152.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A call for volunteers for the French war. April, 1545.</note>

<p>In the following April volunteers were called for,
and those in the city willing to follow the fortunes of
war as "adventurers" were asked to repair to the
sign of the "Gunne," at Billingsgate, where they would
receive directions from John of Caleys, captain of all
such adventurers, for their passage to France.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 239b; Letter Book Q, fo. 167b.</p></note> The
sessions of the law courts were adjourned in order
to give lawyers and suitors an opportunity of showing
their patriotism by taking up arms.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 240.; Letter Book Q, fo. 168; Wriothesley, i, 154.</p></note> The city companies
furnished 100 men appareled "with whyte
cotes of penystone whytes<note place="foot"><p>"A coarse frieze was so called from a small town in the West
Riding of Yorkshire. An Act of 5 and 6 Edward VI (1551-2) provided
that all "clothes commonly called Pennystones or Forest Whites ... shall
conteyne in length beinge wett betwixt twelve and thirtene
yardes."</p></note> or karsies," with a<pb n="413" /><anchor id="Pg413" /><index index="toc" level1="MORE LEVIES TO BE RAISED IN THE CITY." />
red cross of St. George before and behind, each being
provided with a white cap to wear under his "sallett
or scull."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 193b; Letter Book Q, fo. 133; Wriothesley,
i, 154.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The last subsidy to be forthwith paid up.</note>

<p>There yet remained a portion of the last subsidy to
be collected, for which purpose the lord chancellor
once more paid a visit to the city (12 June) and sat
in the Guildhall. Every alderman was straitly
charged to call before him every person in his ward
who was worth £40 and upwards. The king's affairs
were pressing, and this last payment must be immediately
forthcoming.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 155.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A force of 2,000 soldiers demanded of the City, June, 1545.</note>

<p>A week later (19 June) letters from the king
were read to the Court of Aldermen touching the
levying of more forces and firing of beacons&mdash;a French
squadron had appeared off the south coast. It
was resolved to adjourn consideration of the message
until the following Monday, when the lord chancellor
and other lords of the council would again be coming
into the city for the subsidy, and their advice could
be asked. The outcome of these letters was that the
City had to raise a force of 2,000 able men. To do this
an assessment of a fifteenth was ordered to be levied
on the wards, but in the meantime the money so to
be raised was to be advanced by the aldermen.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fos. 203, 212b.</p></note> Not
only were the aldermen on this, as on other occasions,
mulcted in their pocket, but they were also called upon
to personally share with the lord mayor himself and the
sheriffs in the extra watch which in the "besye tyme
of the warres" was ordered to be kept in the city.<note place="foot"><p>30 July.&mdash;Repertory 11, fo. 215b. The Midsummer watch had
not been kept this year.&mdash;Wriothesley, i, 156.</p></note><pb n="414" /><anchor id="Pg414" />
In the meantime a man was despatched by the Court
of Aldermen to St. James' Fair to buy five wey of
cheese for the city's soldiers who were already at
Guildford. The cheese was to be sent by water as
far as Kingston, whence it would be conveyed by
"the good industrye and help of Master Judde, alderman,"
to its destination. The bakers of Stratford
contracted to send two cart-loads of bread. It was
further agreed on the same day that Christopher
Fowlke should forthwith go to Guildford, and further
if need be, "to guyde the seyd vytayle and to utter
the same to the souldyers by thassistence of the
sworde berer and the under chamberleyn. And to
recyve money for the same."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 213.</p></note> A flag and a drum
were likewise to be despatched forthwith. The
citizen soldiers were required to assist in driving out
the French, who had effected a landing in the Isle of
Wight; but before they arrived the enemy had disappeared.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 58.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Boulogne threatened.</note>

<p>The French king now prepared to lay siege to
Boulogne, and the citizens were again called upon to
furnish soldiers. One thousand men were required,
and this number was only raised by enlisting men who
had failed to pass previous musters. However, there
was no time to pick and choose.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 216b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Act for confiscating chantries, &amp;c., 1545.</note>

<p>By this time Henry's resources were fast giving
out. A parliament was summoned to meet in November,
and again resort was had to confiscation for the
purpose of supplying the king with money. An Act
was passed which placed 2,000 chantries and chapels
and over 100 hospitals at Henry's disposal.<note place="foot"><p>Stat. 37, Henry VIII, c. 4.</p></note></p>

<pb n="415" /><anchor id="Pg415" /><index index="toc" level1="ENFORCEMENT OF UNIFORMITY." />

<note place="margin">Peace with France proclaimed, 13 June, 1546.</note>

<p>All parties were, however, tired of the war, and
in the following June (1546) a peace was concluded.
Henry was allowed to retain Boulogne as security for
a debt, and the French admiral soon afterwards paid
a visit to the city, where he was heartily welcomed
and hospitably entertained.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 299b; Letter Book Q, fo. 181; Journal 15, fo.
270; Wriothesley, i, 165.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Uniformity of religion enforced, 1546.</note>

<note place="margin">Recantation of the rector of St. Mary Aldermary.</note>

<p>Freed from the embarrassment of foreign wars,
Henry now had leisure to turn his attention to home
affairs, and more particularly to the establishment of
that uniformity which he so much desired, and
which he endeavoured to bring about by getting rid
of all those who differed in opinion from himself.
Those who openly declared their disbelief in any one
of the "Six Articles," and more particularly in the
first article, which established the doctrine of the real
presence, ran the risk of death by the gallows, the
block or the stake. A city rector, Dr. Crome, of the
church of St. Mary Aldermary, got into disgrace for
speaking lightly of the benefits to be derived from
private masses, and, although his argument tended to
minimise the effect of the recent confiscation of so
many chantries, he was called upon to make a public
recantation at Paul's Cross.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 856; Grey Friars Chron., p. 50.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Trial and execution of Anne Ascue.</note>

<p>Others were not so compliant. Among these was
Anne Ascue or Ascough, a daughter of Sir William
Ascough, of Kelsey, in Lincolnshire, and sometimes
known as Anne Kyme, from the name of her husband,
with whom she had ceased to live. In June, 1545,
she and some others, among whom was another
woman, Joan, wife of John Sauterie, of London, had<pb n="416" /><anchor id="Pg416" />
been arraigned at the Guildhall "for speaking against
the sacrament of the altar"; but, no evidence being
adduced against her, she was on that occasion acquitted
and discharged.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 847.</p></note> Scarcely a year elapsed before she
was again in custody. On the 18th June, 1546, she
was tried at the Guildhall and condemned to be
burned alive as a heretic at Smithfield, where the city
chamberlain had orders to erect a "substantial stage,"
whence the king's council and the civic authorities
might witness the scene.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 181.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Improved water supply of the city, 1545-1546.</note>

<p>The insanitary condition of the city, occasioned
for the most part by an insufficient supply of water,
was not improved by the influx of disbanded and
invalided soldiers, followed by a swarm of vagabonds
and idlers, which took place at the conclusion of
peace with France. To the soldiers licences were
granted to solicit alms for longer or shorter periods,
whilst the vagabonds were ordered to quit the city.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 247.</p></note>
The water question had been taken in hand by the
Common Council towards the close of the preceding
year (1545), when Sir Martin Bowes entered upon
his mayoralty, and a tax of two fifteenths was
imposed upon the inhabitants of the city for the
purpose of conveying fresh water from certain
"lively sprynges" recently discovered at Hackney.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 213b.</p></note>
Bowes himself was very energetic in the matter,
and before he went out of office he had the satisfaction
of seeing a plentiful supply of water brought
into the heart of the city from the suburban manor
of Finsbury.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, i, 162, 175.</p></note></p>

<pb n="417" /><anchor id="Pg417" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AS GOVERNORS OF ROYAL HOSPITALS." />

<note place="margin">St. Bartholomew's Hospital, &amp;c., vested in the City, 13 Jan., 1547.</note>

<p>Henry's reign was now fast drawing to a close.
In April, 1546, he had bestowed an endowment of 500
marks a year on the city poor-houses on condition the
citizens themselves found a similar sum.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fos. 245, 399b, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi></p></note> In January,
1547&mdash;a few days only before he died&mdash;he showed
still further care for the city poor by vesting in the
Corporation, not only St. Bartholomew's Hospital,
thenceforth to be known as the House of the Poor in
West Smithfield, but also the house and church of the
dissolved monastery of the Grey Friars and the house
and hospital of Bethlehem.<note place="foot"><p>"Memoranda ... Royal Hospitals," pp. 20-45.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A committee appointed to investigate the recently acquired property, 6 May, 1547.</note>

<p>The Corporation lost no time in getting their
newly acquired property into working order. On the
6th May the late king's conveyance was read before
the Court of Aldermen, and thereupon a committee,
of which Sir Martin Bowes was a prominent member,
was deputed to make an abstract of the yearly
revenues and charges of the house of the Grey Friars
and hospital of little Saint Bartholomew, and to
report thereon to the court with as much speed as
possible.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 349b.</p></note> From a purely monetary point of view the
City had made a bad bargain, and had saddled itself
with an annual expenditure out of the Corporation
revenues to an extent little thought of at the time.<note place="foot"><p>In Sept., 1547, the citizens were called upon to contribute half a
fifteenth for the maintenance of the poor of St. Bartholomew's.&mdash;Journal
15, fo. 325b. In Dec, 1548, an annual sum of 500 marks out of the
profits of Blackwell, and in 1557 the whole of the same profits were set
aside for the poor.&mdash;Journal 15, fos. 398, <hi rend="font-style: italic">seq.</hi>; Repertory 13, pt. ii,
fo. 512.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king's death, 28 Jan., 1547.</note>

<p>On the 28th January, 1547, Henry died "at hys
most pryncely howse at Westminster, comenly<pb n="418" /><anchor id="Pg418" />
called Yorkeplace or Whytehall"&mdash;the palace which
Cardinal Wolsey built for himself, and which Henry
appropriated, extending its grounds and preserves in
cynical contempt of public convenience and utter
disregard of the chartered rights of the citizens of
London.<note place="foot"><p>Royal proclamation, 7 July, 1545, forbidding all pursuit of game
in Westminster, Islington, Highgate, Hornsey and elsewhere in the
suburbs of London.&mdash;Journal 15, fo. 240b.</p></note> There his corpse remained until the 14th
February, when it was removed at 8 o'clock in the
morning to Sion House, near Richmond, and thence
conveyed to Windsor on the following day.</p>

<note place="margin">Edward VI proclaimed king in the city, 31 Jan., 1547.</note>

<p>In the meantime the mayor, Henry Huberthorne,
or Hoberthorne,<note place="foot"><p>Son of Christopher Huberthorne, of Waddington, co. Lane,
Alderman of Farringdon Within. His mansion adjoined the Leadenhall.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ob.</hi>, Oct., 1556. Buried in the church of St. Peter, Cornhill.&mdash;Machyn.
115, 352. It was in Huberthorne's mayoralty that the customary banquet
to the aldermen, the "officers lerned" and the commoners of the city, on
Monday next after the Feast of Epiphany, known as "Plow Monday,"
was discontinued.&mdash;Letter Book Q, fo. 191b. It was afterwards renewed
and continues to this day in the form of a dinner given by the
new mayor to the officers of his household and clerks engaged in various
departments of the service of the Corporation. An attempt was at the
same time made to put down the lord mayor's banquet also.&mdash;Wriothesley,
i, 176.</p></note> had been sent for (31 Jan.) to attend
the king's council at Westminster, where he received
orders to return to the city and cause himself and his
brother aldermen to be arrayed in their scarlet robes,
in order to accompany the heralds whilst they proclaimed
the new king in various parts of the city.
This being done, the mayor took steps for securing the
peace of the city, and the citizens voted Edward a
benevolence of a fifteenth and a half.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15. fos. 303b, 305b; Letter Book Q, os. 192b, 194;
Wriothesley. i, 178.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Distribution of gowns of black livery.</note>

<p>Edward on his part presented the mayor and
aldermen with 104 gowns of black livery, according to
the precedent followed at the decease of Henry VII.<pb n="419" /><anchor id="Pg419" /><index index="toc" level1="FUNERAL OF HENRY THE EIGHTH." />
These gowns were distributed among the mayor
and aldermen, the high officers and certain clerks
in the service of the Corporation. Ten aldermen
accompanied the remains of the late king on their
way to Windsor, riding forth in black coats with the
rest of the mourners, the harness and bridles of their
horses being covered with black cloth. Two of the
aldermen, Sir William Laxton and Sir Martin Bowes,
had each four servants in their suite, whilst the rest
of the aldermen had three, all in black coats.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 304; Letter Book Q, fo. 195; Repertory 11,
fo. 335b.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="420" /><anchor id="Pg420" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XV.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">Accession and coronation of Edward VI, 1547.</note>

<p>Provision had been made for the succession to
the crown on Henry's death by an Act of Parliament
passed in 1544, and the princesses Mary and Elizabeth
were thereby re-instated in their rights of
inheritance as if no question of their legitimacy had
ever been raised. As Edward, who was next in
succession to the crown, was but a boy, Henry had
taken pains to select a council of regency in which
no one party should predominate. This council was
soon set aside, and Hertford, the king's uncle, got
himself appointed Protector of the realm and took
the title of Duke of Somerset. At the time of his
father's death Edward was residing at Hertford Castle.
He was soon afterwards carried thence by his uncle
to London and lodged in the Tower, where the mayor,
Henry Hoberthorne, went to pay his respects and
received the honour of knighthood.<note place="foot"><p>"The lord mayor of London, Henry Hobulthorne, was called
fourth, who kneeling before the king, his majestie tooke the sworde of
the Lord Protector and made him knight, which was the first that eaver
he made."&mdash;Wriothesley's Chron. (Camd. Soc, N.S., No. 11.), i, 181.</p></note></p>

<p>On the 19th the young king passed through the
city to Westminster, the mayor riding before him
bareheaded with the mace of crystal<note place="foot"><p>This mace is still in possession of the Corporation. It is only
brought out for use on such occasions as a coronation, when it is carried
by the lord mayor as on the occasion narrated above, and at the annual
election of the chief magistrate of the city, when it is formally handed
by the Chamberlain to the lord mayor elect. The mace consists of a
tapering shaft of rock crystal mounted in gold, with a coroneted head
also of gold, adorned with pearls and large jewels. Its age is uncertain.
Whilst some hazard the conjecture that it may be of Saxon origin,
there are others who are of opinion that the head of it at least cannot
be earlier than the 15th century.</p></note> in his hand.<pb n="421" /><anchor id="Pg421" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CORONATION OF EDWARD VI." />
The streets were lined with members of the livery
companies. The conduits, the standard and cross in
Chepe, the Ludgate and the Temple Bar had been
freshly painted and trimmed with goodly hangings of
Arras and cloth of gold for the occasion. At three of
the conduits, namely, the conduit in Cornhill, the
great conduit in Chepe, and the conduit in Fleet
Street, wine was made by artificial means to flow as
if from the "festrons" of the conduits themselves.
At the little conduit in Chepe were stationed the
aldermen of the city, in their scarlet gowns, and the
Recorder, who, in the name of the whole city, presented
his majesty with 1,000 marks in "hole new
sufferaynes" of gold in a purse of purple cloth of gold,
which his majesty deigned to accept with his own
hand. The next day Edward was crowned. The lord
mayor, according to custom, attended with his crystal
mace as the king passed from his palace to church, and
thence, after mass, to Westminster Hall, and received
for his services the customary gold cup, which on this
occasion weighed twenty ounces, with its cover and a
"leyer" (or laver) silver-gilt weighing six ounces.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 305; Letter Book Q, fos. 195b-196; Repertory 11,
fo. 334b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Opposition in the city to the sacrament of the mass, 1547-1548.</note>

<p>The work of reformation was now about to be
taken seriously in hand. Something, it is true, had
been done in this direction under Henry, but in
<hi rend="font-style: italic">dilettante</hi> fashion. The ceremony connected with
the boy-bishop, which even Colet had thought
worthy to be perpetuated in his school,<note place="foot"><p>"All these chyldren shall every Chyldermasse day come to Paulis
Church and here the chylde bisshoppis sermon, and after be at the hye
masse, and eche of them offer a 1<hi rend="vertical-align: super">d.</hi> to the childe bisshop and with theme
the maisters and surveyors of the scole."&mdash;Statutes of St. Paul's School,
printed in Lupton's "Life of Dean Colet," p. 278b.</p></note> had been<pb n="422" /><anchor id="Pg422" />
abolished by order of the mayor in 1538.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book P, fo. 172b.</p></note> The ruthless
destruction of the shrine of St. Thomas at
Canterbury, and the erasure of his name from service-books,
had been followed in the city by an order
(1539) for a new common seal on which the arms of
the city were substituted for the original effigy of
the saint.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 14, fo. 158b; Letter Book P, fo. 197.</p></note> Henry himself only coquetted with
Protestantism; his chief object, if not the only one,
was to get rid of the papal supremacy; but among
the bourgeois class of the city there was an earnest
desire to see an improvement made in the doctrine
and discipline of the Church.<note place="foot"><p>See Brewer's Introd. to Cal. Letters and Papers For. and Dom.,
vol. iv, pp. dcli-dcliii.</p></note></p>

<p>Whilst the statute of the Six Articles was still
unrepealed, the sacrament of the mass frequently
provoked open hostility in the city. Thus, in August,
1538, Robert Reynold, a stationer, was declared upon
the oath of five independent witnesses to have been
heard to say "that the masse was nawght, and the
memento was Bawdrye, and after the consecracioun
of the masse yt was idolatrye." He was further
charged with having said that it were better for him
to confess and be houseled by a temporal rather than
a spiritual man.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book P, fo. 153.</p></note> Again, in February, 1543, Hugh
Eton, a hosier of London, was convicted of disguising
himself "in fonde fassyon," and of irreverently walking
up and down in St. Bride's Church before the sacrament,
disturbing the priests at mass and creating a
tumult. By way of punishment for his offence he was
set in the cage in Fleet Street, "disguised" as he was,<pb n="423" /><anchor id="Pg423" /><index index="toc" level1="THE REFORMATION." />
with a paper on his head setting forth his offence.
He there remained until four o'clock in the afternoon,
when he was removed to the compter and condemned
to stay there a prisoner until he found sureties for
good behaviour.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 102.</p></note></p>

<p>After the repeal of the statute by Edward's first
parliament, the opposition to the "sacrament of the
altar," as the mass was called, became greater than
ever.<note place="foot"><p>"Also this same tyme [Nov., 1547] was moche spekying agayne
the sacrament of the auter, that some callyd it Jacke of the boxe, with
divers other shamefulle names... And at this tyme [Easter, 1548]
was more prechyng agayne the masse."&mdash;Grey Friars Chron., p. 55.</p></note> A boy was ordered to be whipt naked in the
church of St. Mary Woolnoth for throwing his cap at
the host at the time of elevation.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 250b.</p></note> In February,
1548, information was given to the Court of Aldermen
of preachers having used "certain words" touching the
mass in the churches of St. Dunstan in the east and
St. Martin Orgar.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 423.</p></note> On the 5th May, 1548, the mayor
and aldermen resolved to appear the next day before
the Lord Protector Somerset and the council, and
explain the nature of the misdemeanours of certain
preachers, concerning which the mayor had already
had some communication with the Archbishop of
Canterbury.<note place="foot"><p>"After the redyng of the preposycioun made yesterday in the Sterre
Chamber by the lorde chaunceler and y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> declaracioun made by my lorde
mayer of suche comunicacioun as his lordshyp had w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi> the Bysshop of
Caunterburye concernyng the demeano<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> of certein prechers and other
dysobedyent persones yt was ordered and agreyd that my lorde mayer
and all my maisters thaldermen shall this afternone att ij of y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> clok
repayre to my lorde protectors grace and the hole counseill and declare
unto theim the seid mysdemeanor and that thei shall mete att Saint
Martyns in the Vyntrey att one of the clok."&mdash;Repertory 11, fo. 456b.</p></note></p>

<p>In the following month (5 June) the Court of
Aldermen investigated a charge made against a city<pb n="424" /><anchor id="Pg424" />
curate that, about a month before, after reciting the
common prayers at the choir door at high mass, he
had prayed among other things that Almighty God
might send the king's council grace and bring them
out of the erroneous opinions that they were then in.
The informer went on to say that Sir Clement Smith
and the Recorder, who were present, laughed at the
prayer. But inasmuch as the informer had not been
present himself, and that what he had laid before the
court was mere hearsay evidence, little attention was
paid to it.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 465.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Act for abolition of chantries, 1547.</note>

<p>The abolition of chantries initiated by Henry
VIII was carried out to a fuller extent by his successor.
The statute (1 Edward VI, cap 14) by which
this was effected not only deprived a large number of
priests of a means of livelihood, but laid them open to
insult from those they met in the street. They complained
that they could not walk abroad nor attend
the court at Westminster without being reviled and
having their tippets and caps violently pulled.<note place="foot"><p>A proclamation against the evil behaviour of citizens and others
against priests, 12 Nov., 1547.&mdash;Letter Book Q. fo. 218; Journal 15,
fo. 335b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Redemption of charges for superstitious uses by the city and companies, 1550.</note>

<p>The same statute&mdash;by declaring all chantries,
obits, lights and lamps to be objects of superstitious
use, and all goods, chattels, jewels, plate, ornaments
and other moveables hitherto devoted to their maintenance
to be thenceforth escheated to the Crown&mdash;dealt
a heavy blow to the Corporation of the City of
London, as well as to the civic companies and other
bodies who owned property subject to certain payments
under one or other of these heads. Three years after<pb n="425" /><anchor id="Pg425" /><index index="toc" level1="SUPERSTITIOUS USES." />
the passing of the Act the Corporation and the companies
redeemed certain charges of this character on
their respective properties to the amount of £939 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi>
5-1/2<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> by payment to the Crown of no less a sum than
£18,744 11<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi><note place="foot"><p>By letters patent dated 14 July, 1550 (preserved at the Guildhall,
Box 17).</p></note></p>

<p>The redemption of these and other charges of a
similar character, whilst very convenient to the Crown,
saving the trouble and expense of collecting small
sums of money, worked a hardship upon the Corporation
and the companies. In order to raise funds
for redeeming the charges they were obliged to
sell property. This property was often held under
conditions of reverter and remainders over, unless
what was now declared to be illegal was religiously
carried out. It was manifestly unfair that they should
be made to forfeit property because the conditions
under which it was held could no longer be legally
complied with. A petition therefore was presented
to the king in order to obviate this difficulty, and to
enable them to part with the necessary property and
at the same time to give a clear title.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 166b; Wriothesley's Chron. (Camden Soc.,
N.S., No. 20), ii, 35. See also exemplification of Act of Parl. passed
a° 5 Edward VI, in accordance with the terms of this petition (Box 29).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Order for demolition of images, pictures, &amp;c., Aug., 1547.</note>

<p>In the meantime (Aug., 1547) an order had gone
forth for the demolition of all images and removal of
pictures and stained glass from churches. The instructions
sent to the lord mayor were very precise.
"Stories made in glasse wyndows" relative to Thomas
Becket were to be altered at as little expense as possible.
Images and pictures to which no offerings and no
prayers were made might remain for "garnisshement"<pb n="426" /><anchor id="Pg426" />
of the churches; and if any such had been taken down
the mayor was at liberty to set them up again, unless
they had been taken down by order of the king's
commissioners or the parson of the church. If there
existed in any church a "storye in glasse" of the
Bishop of Rome, otherwise the Pope, the mayor
might paint out the papal tiara and alter the "storye."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 322; Letter Book Q, fo. 210b.</p></note>
These instructions, contained in a letter from the
king's council, were duly considered at a Court of
Aldermen held on the 22nd September, with the
result that every alderman was ordered, in the most
secret, discreet and quiet manner he could devise, to
visit each parish church in his ward, and to take with
him the parson or curate and two or three honest
parishioners, churchwardens or others who had had
anything to do with the removal of the images that
had already been taken down, and, having shut
the church door for the sake of privacy, to take a
note in writing of what images had formerly been
in the several churches, what images had offerings
and were prayed to, and what not; who had removed
those taken down, and what had been done
with them. A report was to be made on these points
by every alderman at the next court, so that the
lords of the council might be informed thereon and
their will ascertained before any further steps were
taken.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11. fo. 373; Letter Book Q, fo. 214.</p></note></p>

<p>The havoc worked by the king's commissioners
in the city and throughout the country by the reckless
destruction of works of art was terrible. The
churches were stripped of every ornament, their walls<pb n="427" /><anchor id="Pg427" /><index index="toc" level1="SPOLIATION OF THE CHURCHES." />
whitewashed, and only relieved by the tables of
the commandments. Early in September the commissioners
visited St. Paul's and pulled down all the
images. In November the rood was taken down
with its images of the Virgin and St. John. The great
cross of the rood fell down accidentally and killed
one of the workmen, a circumstance which many
ascribed to the special intervention of the Almighty.
From St. Paul's the commissioners proceeded to the
church of St. Bride, and so from parish church to
parish church.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., 54, 55; Wriothesley. ii, 1.</p></note></p>

<p>In the following year (1548) the chapel of St.
Paul's charnel house was pulled down and the
bones removed into the country and reburied. From
a sanitary point of view their removal is to be commended.
There is no such excuse, however, for the
destruction of the cloister in Pardon churchyard
(April, 1549), with its famous picture of the Dance
of Death, painted at the expense of John Carpenter, the
town clerk of the city, of whom mention has already
been made. The fact was that the Protector Somerset
required material for building his new palace in
the Strand,<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 58. In May (1548) the duke applied to the
City for water to be laid on to Stronde House, afterwards known as
Somerset House.&mdash;Repertory 11, fos. 462b, 484; Journal 15. fo. 383b;
Letter Book Q, fo. 253b.</p></note> to enlarge which he had already pulled
down Strand Church, dedicated to Saint Mary and
the Holy Innocents.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 55.</p></note> The destruction of the cloister
necessitated a new order of procession on the next
Lord Mayor's Day (24 Oct.), when Sir Rowland Hill
paid the customary visit to St. Paul's, made a circuit<pb n="428" /><anchor id="Pg428" />
of the interior of the cathedral, and said a <hi rend="font-style: italic">De profundis</hi>
at the bishop's tomb.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 29. Touching the ceremony of visiting the tomb
of the Bishop of London, to whom the citizens were indebted for the
charter of William the Conqueror, see chap. i, p. 35.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The citizens and the Grey Friars Church, 1547.</note>

<p>Nor can the civic authorities themselves be altogether
acquitted of vandalism. They destroyed the
churches of St. Nicholas Shambles and St. Ewin, and
sold the plate and windows, but the proceeds were
distributed among the poor.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fos. 232, 234b; Repertory 11, fos. 356, 415, 431,
444b, 511b.</p></note> They went further than
this. They removed the fine tombs and altars, as well
as the choir stalls, from the church of the Grey Friars,
where mingled the ashes of some of the noblest and
best in the land. There was some excuse, however,
for these acts. The house and church of the Grey
Friars had been granted to the City at the close of
the last reign on the express condition that the
churches of St. Nicholas and St. Ewin should be
abolished, and that the church of the Grey Friars
should be established as a parish church in their
place under the name of Christ Church. It was
probably in order to render the old monastic church
more convenient as a parish church that they removed
much of what to the antiquary of to-day would
have seemed of priceless value, and at the same time
reduced the dimensions of the choir.<note place="foot"><p>"Item, at this same tyme [<hi rend="font-style: italic">circ.</hi> Sept., 1547] was pullyd up alle the
tomes, grett stones, alle the auteres, with stalles and walles of the qweer
and auters in the church that was some tyme the Gray freeres, and solde
and the qweer made smaller."&mdash;Grey Friars Chron., p. 54.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The "communion" substituted for the mass, 1548.</note>

<p>At Easter, 1548, a new communion service in
English took the place of the mass.<note place="foot"><p>"At Ester followyng there began the commonion, and confession
but of thoys that wolde, as the boke dothe specifythe."&mdash;Grey Friars
Chron., p. 55; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Wriothesley (Camd. Soc, N.S., No. 20), ii, 2.</p></note> At the election<pb n="429" /><anchor id="Pg429" /><index index="toc" level1="THE TUNING OF THE PULPITS." />
of the mayor on the following Michaelmas-day, on
which occasion a mass had always been celebrated at
the Guildhall Chapel since the time of Whitington, an
endeavour appears to have been made by the Court
of Aldermen to effect a compromise between mass
and communion, for whilst it ordered that a mass of
the Holy Ghost should be solemnly sung in English
in the Guildhall Chapel (which had been confiscated
by Henry VIII)<note place="foot"><p>The Guildhall college, chapel and library were restored to the
City in 1550, by Edward VI, on payment of £456 13<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>,&mdash;Pat. Roll
4 Edward VI, p. 9m. (32) 20; Letter Book R, fo. 64b.</p></note> as theretofore, it further ordered
that the holy communion should be administered to
two or three of the priests there at the same mass.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 11, fo. 493b.</p></note>
Orders were issued by the king's council that candles
should no longer be carried about on Candlemas-day,
ashes on Ash Wednesday, palms on Palm Sunday.
These practices were now considered superstitious, as
also was the "sensyng" which hitherto had taken
place in St. Paul's at Whitsuntide, but which the
Court of Aldermen now decreed to be abolished, and
the preaching of sermons substituted in its place.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 455. (431 pencil mark); Letter Book Q, fo. 237. "This
yeare in the Whitson holidaies my lord maior [Sir John Gresham]
caused three notable sermons to be made at Sainct Marie Spittell,
according as they are kept at Easter.... And the sensing in
Poules cleene put downe."&mdash;Wriothesley, ii, 2, 3. The processions
were kept up in 1554, "but there was no sensynge."&mdash;Grey Friars
Chron., p. 89.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin"> The "tuning of the pulpits."</note>

<p>The people were at this time extremely distracted
by the various and contradictory opinions of their
preachers; and as they were totally incapable of judging
of the force of arguments adduced on one side or
the other, but conceived that everything spoken from
the pulpit was of equal authority, great confusion and
perplexity of mind ensued. In order to "tune the<pb n="430" /><anchor id="Pg430" />
pulpits" and to effect uniformity of doctrine and
service, the Lord Protector resorted to proclamations,
which, although no longer having the authority of
statutes as in the reign of Henry VIII, practically
answered the same purpose. Preaching was thus
restricted to those who had previously obtained a
licence from the king, his visitors, the archbishop of
Canterbury, or the bishop of the diocese.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Journal 15, fo. 352b; Letter Book Q, fos. 230-252b. "This
yeare [1548] the xxviii<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> daie of September, proclamation was made to
inhibite all preachers generallie till the kinges further pleasure. After
which daie all sermons seasede at Poules Crosse and in all other
places."&mdash;Wriothesley, ii, 6.</p></note> The same
want of uniformity which appeared in the preachers
appeared also in their congregations; some "kepte
holy day and manny kepte none, but dyd worke
opynly, and in some churches servys and some none,
soche was the devysyon."<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., pp. 59, 62. Occasionally the chronicler is
overcome by his feelings, and cries out, "Almyghty God helpe it whan
hys wylle ys!" <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 67.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The insurrections of 1549.</note>

<p>In the meantime great discontent had been caused
by the Protector's measures. The rich nobleman and
country gentleman said nothing, for their assent had
been purchased by gifts of church property, but the
tenants and bourgeois class suffered from increased
rents, from enclosures and evictions. Church lands
had always been underlet; the monks were easy
landlords. Not so the new proprietors of the confiscated
abbey lands, they were determined to make
the most out of their newly-acquired property.<note place="foot"><p>In some cases the new owners may have experienced some difficulty
in fixing a fair rent, as appears to have been the case with the City of
London and its recently acquired property of Bethlehem. When the
Chamberlain reported that the rents demanded for houses in the
precincts of the hospital were far too high, he was at once authorised
to reduce them at discretion.&mdash;Letter Book R, fo. 10b.</p></note>
Insurrection broke out in various parts of the<pb n="431" /><anchor id="Pg431" /><index index="toc" level1="CRANMER AT ST. PAUL'S." />
country. Not only were enclosures thrown open and
fences removed, but a cry was raised for the restoration
of the old religion. Information of what was
taking place was sent to Sir Henry Amcotes, the
mayor, and steps were at once taken (2 July, 1549)
for putting the city into a state of defence and for the
preservation of the king's peace. A "false draw-brydge"
was ordered (<hi rend="font-style: italic">inter alia</hi>) to be made for
London Bridge "in case nede should requyer by reason
"of the sterrynge of the people (which God defende!)
to caste downe thother."<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 11b.</p></note> The city gates were constantly
watched and the walls mounted with artillery.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 60; Wriothesley, ii, 15, 16.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Cranmer at St. Paul's, 21 July, 1549.</note>

<p>In the midst of these preparations there was a
lull. On the 21st day of July, being the 6th Sunday
after Trinity, came Archbishop Cranmer to St. Paul's.
He wore no vestment save a cope over an alb, and
bore neither mitre nor cross, but only a staff. He
conducted the whole of the service as set out in the
"king's book" recently published, which differed but
slightly from the church service in use at the present
day, and he administered the "Communion" to himself,
the dean and others, according to Act of Parliament.
The mayor and most of the aldermen occupied
seats in the choir. Cranmer's object in coming to the
city on that day was to exhort the citizens to obey the
king as the supreme head of the realm, and to pray the
Almighty to avert the trouble with which, for their
sins, they were threatened.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 16, 17; Grey Friars Chron., p. 60.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king passes through the city, 23 July.</note>

<p>Two days later (23 July) the king himself left
Greenwich and rode through the city to Westminster,<pb n="432" /><anchor id="Pg432" />
accompanied by the Lord Protector and other nobles.
The mayor and aldermen rode out to Southwark, the
former in a gown of crimson velvet, the latter in
gowns of scarlet, to meet the royal party, and conducted
it as far as Charing Cross, where the aldermen took
their leave, the king saluting them and "putting of
his capp to everie of them." The mayor rode on to
Westminster, where the king and the Protector
graciously bade him farewell.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 19.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Ket's rebellion in Norfolk. 1549.</note>

<p>The aspect of affairs began to look black indeed.
By the end of the month Exeter was being besieged
by the rebels, and on the 8th August the French
ambassador, taking advantage of the general distraction,
bade the Lord Protector open defiance at
Whitehall.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 20; Grey Friars Chron., p. 61.</p></note> At midnight instructions were sent to
the mayor to seize all Frenchmen in the city who
were not denizens, together with their property.
By this time, however, Exeter had been relieved and
the insurrection in the west had been put down.
The western insurgents had demanded the restoration
of the mass and the abolition of the English liturgy.
Contemporaneously with this religious movement
another agitation was being made in the eastern
counties, and more especially in Norfolk, which had
for its object the destruction of enclosures. With the
eastern rebels, who placed themselves under the
leadership of Robert Ket, a tanner of Wymondham,
the Protector himself sympathized at heart, and the
council had to exercise no little pressure before he
could be induced to send an efficient force to put them
down. At length the rebels were met and defeated<pb n="433" /><anchor id="Pg433" /><index index="toc" level1="KETS REBELLION." />
by a force under the command of the Earl of
Warwick, the son of the extortionate Dudley who
was associated with Empson in oppressing the city
towards the close of the reign of Henry VII. Ket
galloped off the field, leaving his followers to be
ridden down and killed by the earl's horsemen. He
was shortly afterwards captured in a barn, and
eventually brought up to London, together with his
brother William, and committed to the Tower.
Being arraigned and convicted of treason, they were
handed over to the high sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk.
Robert was hanged in chains on the top of Norwich
Castle, whilst his brother William suffered a similar
fate on the top of Wymondham Steeple.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 982-984.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The fall of Somerset, 1549.</note>

<p>Somerset's fall was now imminent. The citizens
hated him, not for his favouring the reformers, but
for the injury he had caused to trade and for his
having bebased the coinage still further than it had
been debased by Henry VIII. His colleagues in the
council, who had been pampered with gifts of church
lands, were angry with him for the favour he had
shown towards those who raised the outcry against
enclosures, and they began to show their independence.</p>

<note place="margin">Letter from lords of the council to the City accusing the Protector, 6 Oct.</note>

<p>On the afternoon of Sunday, the 6th October,
1549, a letter was sent to the mayor subscribed by
Lord St. John, the president of the council, the earls
of Warwick, Southampton and Arundel, and other
members of the council, containing a long indictment
of the Protector's policy and conduct. He was proud,
covetous and ambitious. He had embezzled the pay
of the soldiers, with which he was building sumptuous<pb n="434" /><anchor id="Pg434" />
houses in four or five different places. Whilst sowing
discord among the nobles, he flattered the commons
to the intent that, having got rid of the former, he
might with the aid of the latter achieve his scarcely
veiled design of supplanting the king himself. They
had hoped, the letter continues, to have persuaded
the duke by fair means to take order for the security
of the king's person and the commonwealth; but no
sooner was the matter broached to the duke than he
showed himself determined to appeal to the arbitrament
of the sword. Such being the case, they on
their part were no less resolved, with God's help, to
deliver the king and the realm from impending ruin,
or perish in the attempt. They concluded by asking
the civic authorities to see that good watch and ward
were kept in the city and that no <hi rend="font-style: italic">matériel</hi> of war
was supplied to the duke or his followers. Any
letters or proclamations coming from the Protector
were to be disregarded.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 40; Journal 16, fo. 36.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Letter from Somerset to the mayor, 6 Oct., 1549.</note>

<p>Determined not to be forestalled by his enemies;
the duke himself wrote the same day (6 Oct.) to the
mayor desiring the City to furnish him forthwith with
1,000 trusty men fully armed for the protection of the
king's person. The men were to be forwarded to
him at Hampton by the following Monday mid-day
at the latest, and in the meantime the citizens were
to take steps to protect the king and his uncle, the
duke, against conspiracy.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 39b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Conference between the lords and the City at Ely Place, 6 Oct., 1549.</note>

<p>Before these letters had been despatched the
mayor and aldermen had been summoned by the
Earl of Warwick, who now took the lead against<pb n="435" /><anchor id="Pg435" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY OPPOSED TO THE PROTECTOR." />
Somerset, to meet him and other lords of the council
at his house in Ely Place, Holborn. A meeting had
accordingly taken place that Sunday morning, when
the state of affairs was discussed. After the meeting
separated Warwick came to the city and took up
his residence in the house of Sir John York, one of
the sheriffs, situate in Walbrook. Sir John Markham,
lieutenant of the Tower, was removed, and Sir
Leonard Chamberlain appointed in his place, whilst
the Court of Aldermen took extraordinary precautions
for safe-guarding the city.<note place="foot"><p>Acts of the Privy Council, ii, 331-332; Wriothesley, ii, 24-25;
Holinshed, iii, 1014; Repertory 12, pt. i, fos. 149-150.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Removal of the king to Windsor.</note>

<p>As soon as Somerset was made aware of the
Tower being in the possession of his rivals he
removed from Hampton Court to Windsor, carrying
the young king with him, and despatched a letter to
Lord Russell to hurry thither with such force as he
could muster.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 1014-1015; Acts of Privy Council, ii, 333.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City joins the lords against Somerset, 7 Oct., 1549.</note>

<p>On Monday (7 Oct.) the lords of the council
sat at Mercers' Hall&mdash;they felt safer in London&mdash;and
thence despatched a dutiful letter to the king, and
another (explaining their conduct) to Cranmer.<note place="foot"><p>Acts of Privy Council, ii, fos. 333-336.</p></note> The
Common Council met at seven o'clock that morning,
having been warned on Sunday night.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 12, pt. i, fo. 150b.</p></note> The object of
their meeting so early in the day was that no time
might be lost before taking into consideration the
letters that had been received from Somerset and
from the lords. After due deliberation the citizens
agreed to throw in their lot with the lords and to
assist them "to the uttermost of their wills and<pb n="436" /><anchor id="Pg436" />
powers" in the maintenance and defence of the
king's person.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 40b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The lords attend a Common Council, 8 Oct., 1549.</note>

<p>On Tuesday (8 Oct.) the Common Council again
assembled in the Guildhall to meet the lords by
appointment. Rumour had been spread to the effect
that it was the intention of the lords to cause a reestablishment
of the old religion.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 43-43b.</p></note> This the lords
assured the meeting was far from their minds. They
intended no alteration of matters as established by
the laws and statutes. All they wanted was to cause
them to be maintained as formerly, before they had
been "disformed" by the Lord Protector, and for this
they prayed the assistance of the citizens. Thereupon
the mayor, aldermen and common council,
thanking God for the good intentions of their lordships,
"promised their ayde and helpe to the uttermost
of their lieves and goodes."<note place="foot"><p>Acts of Privy Council, ii, 336, 337.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A meeting at Sheriff York's house, 9 Oct.</note>

<note place="margin">The City agrees to furnish a contingent of soldiers to aid the lords.</note>

<p>On Wednesday (9 Oct.) the lords met at the
house of Sheriff York, where they had dined the
previous day.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 26.</p></note> They had heard that Somerset had
seized all the armour, weapons and munitions of war
he could lay his hands upon, both at Hampton Court
and Windsor, and with them had armed his adherents.
They again sent letters to the king, the archbishop
and others, and declared Somerset to be unworthy to
continue any longer in the position of Protector.<note place="foot"><p>Acts of Privy Council, ii, 337-342.</p></note>
The Common Council, which met the same day&mdash;"for
divers urgent causes moved and declared by the
mouth of the recorder and of the lord mayor and
aldermen on the king's behalf"&mdash;agreed to furnish<pb n="437" /><anchor id="Pg437" /><index index="toc" level1="THE PROTECTOR LODGED IN THE TOWER." />
with all speed 500 men, or if necessary 1,000 men,
well harnessed and weaponed, to proceed to Windsor
Castle for the delivery and preservation of his majesty.
It was subsequently arranged that 100 of the contingent
should be horsemen.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fos. 41-42; Journal 16, fos. 37, 37b. According
to Holinshed (iii, 1017, 1018), considerable opposition was made by a
member of the Common Council named George Stadlow to any force at
all being sent by the city. He reminded the court of the evils that had
arisen in former times from the city rendering support to the barons
against Henry III, and how the city lost its liberties in consequence.
The course he recommended was that the city should join the lords in
making a humble representation to the king as to the Protector's conduct.</p></note> By the afternoon of
Friday (11 Oct.) the men and horsemen were ready.
They mustered in Moorfields, whence they marched
through Moorgate, Coleman Street, Cheapside, and
out by Newgate to Smithfield, with the Sword-bearer
riding before them as captain. At Smithfield they broke
off, and were discharged from further service
for the time.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 26, 27.</p></note> There is no evidence to show that the
force was ever called upon to proceed to Windsor.</p>

<note place="margin">The effect of the City's adhesion to the lords.</note>

<note place="margin">Somerset brought to the Tower, 14 Oct.</note>

<p>The adhesion of the City to the lords had in the
meanwhile added strength to their cause, many who
had at first held back now declaring themselves against
Somerset. In this manner they were joined by Lord
Chancellor Rich, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Chief Justice
Montague and others, whose signatures appear to a
proclamation issued on the 8th October setting forth
"the verye trowth of the Duke of Somersettes evell
government and false and detestable procedynges."<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 37; Journal 16, fo. 34; Wriothesley, ii, 26.</p></note>
By the end of the week (12 Oct.) the lords felt
themselves strong enough to proceed in person to
Windsor, where on their knees they explained their
conduct to the king, who received them graciously and<pb n="438" /><anchor id="Pg438" />
gave them hearty thanks. The following day (Sunday)
was spent in removing some of Somerset's followers;
and on Monday (14th) Somerset himself was brought
prisoner to London, "riding through Oldborne in at
Newgate and so to the Tower of London, accompanied
with diuers lordes and gentlemen with 300
horse, the lord maior, Sir Ralph Warren, Sir John
Gresham, Mr. Recorder, Sir William Locke and both
the shiriffes and other knights, sitting on their horses
agaynst Soper-lane, with all the officers with halbards,
and from Oldborne bridge to the Tower certaine
aldermen or their deputies on horsebacke in
every streete, with a number of housholders standing
with bils as hee passed."<note place="foot"><p>Stow's "Summarie of the Chronicles of England" (ed. 1590),
p. 545; Wriothesley, ii, 27, 28. The names are given differently in the
Acts of the Privy Council, ii, 344.</p></note></p>

<p>At the sudden fall of one who for a short time
had been all powerful&mdash;a little more than a week had
served to deprive him of the protectorate and render
him a prisoner in the Tower&mdash;did it cross the mind of
any of the onlookers that he it was who carried away
from the Guildhall Library some cartloads of books
which were never returned?</p>

<note place="margin">Bonner deprived of bishopric of London, 1 Oct., 1549.</note>

<p>There were some who looked upon Somerset's
fall as an act of God's vengeance for his having caused
Bonner to be deprived of his bishopric of London.
On the 1st September last Bonner had preached at
Paul's Cross against the king's supremacy. Information
of the matter was given to the council, and
Bonner was called upon to answer for his conduct
before Cranmer and the rest of the commissioners.
The informers on this occasion were William Latymer,<pb n="439" /><anchor id="Pg439" /><index index="toc" level1="THE KING ENTERTAINED BY SHERIFF YORK." />
the parson of the church of St. Laurence Pountney,
and John Hooper, a zealous Protestant, who afterwards
became Bishop of Gloucester. Whilst under
examination before the commissioners Bonner was
confined in the Marshalsea. Hooper in the meantime
was put up by Cranmer to preach at Paul's Cross,
and he took the opportunity thus afforded him of
inveighing strongly against Bonner's conduct. Bonner
failed to satisfy the commissioners, and on the 1st
October was deprived of office and committed to
prison during the king's pleasure. "But marke what
followeth," writes the chronicler of the Grey Friars,
within a week "was proclaymyd the protector a
traytor."<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., pp. 63, 64; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Wriothesley, ii, 24.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The king entertained by Sheriff York, Oct., 1549.</note>

<p>On the 17th October Edward came from Hampton
Court to Southwark Place, a mansion formerly
belonging to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, when
it was known as Suffolk House. It was now used in
part as a mint, and was occupied by Sheriff York in
his capacity as master of the king's mint. After
dinner the king knighted York in recognition of his
hospitality and his past services, an honour personal
to York and not extended to his colleague in the
shrievalty, Richard Turke. From Southwark Edward
set forth to ride through the city to Westminster,
accompanied by a long cavalcade of nobles and gentlemen,
"the lord mayor bearinge the scepter before his
maiestie and rydinge with garter kinge of armes."<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 28.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Somerset released on parole, 6 Feb., 1550.</note>

<p>Somerset's confinement in the Tower was not of
long duration. On the 6th February, 1550, the
lieutenant of the Tower received orders to bring his<pb n="440" /><anchor id="Pg440" />
prisoner "with out greate garde or busyness" to Sheriff
York's house in Walbrook, where the council was
sitting; and on the duke entering into a recognisance
to remain privately either at Shene or Sion, and not
to travel more than four miles from either place, nor
attempt to gain an interview with the young king, he
was allowed to depart.<note place="foot"><p>Acts of Privy Council, ii, 384; Wriothesley, ii, 33.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Warwick and the reformers, 1550.</note>

<p>With Warwick, who became the ruling spirit of
the council after the fall of Somerset and the abolition
of the protectorate, religion was a matter of supreme
indifference, and for a time it was uncertain whether
he would favour the followers of the old religion or
the advanced reformers. He chose to extend his
patronage to the latter. The day after Somerset's
release from the Tower, Bonner was again brought
from the Marshalsea, where he had been roughly used,<note place="foot"><p>For more than a week he had been compelled to lie on nothing
but straw, his bed having been taken away by order of the knight
marshal for refusing to pay an extortionate fee.&mdash;Grey Friars Chron.,
p. 65.</p></note>
and the cause of his deprivation reconsidered by the
lords of the council sitting in the Star Chamber, the
result being that the previous sentence by Cranmer
was confirmed and Bonner again relegated to prison.
Bishops were now appointed directly by the king,
who in the following April caused Nicholas Ridley,
bishop of Rochester, to be transferred to London in
Bonner's place; and the see of Westminster,<note place="foot"><p>Thomas Thurlby, the last abbot of Westminster, became the first
and only bishop of the see. Upon the union of the see with that of
London Thurlby became bishop of Norwich. Among the archives of
the city there is a release by him, in his capacity as bishop of Westminster,
and the dean and chapter of the same, to the City of London
of the parish church of St. Nicholas, Shambles. The document is dated
14 March, 1549, and has the seals of the bishopric and of the dean and
chapter, in excellent preservation, appended.</p></note> which<pb n="441" /><anchor id="Pg441" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BOROUGH OF SOUTHWARK." />
had been created in 1540, was united to London. In
July Hooper was nominated to the see of Gloucester;
but some time elapsed before this rigid reformer could
be induced to overcome his prejudice to episcopal
vestments (which he denounced as the livery of Anti-Christ)
and consent to be consecrated in them.<note place="foot"><p>For objecting to the prescribed vestments, he was committed to
the Fleet by order of the Privy Council, 27 Jan., 1551, and was not
consecrated until the following 8th March.&mdash;Hooper to Bullinger,
1 Aug., 1551 ("Original Letters relative to the English Reformation." ed.
for Parker Society, 1846, p. 91).</p></note> As
soon as the ceremony was over he cast them off.</p>

<note place="margin">The City and the borough of Southwark, 1550.</note>

<p>For some time past the City had experienced
difficulty in exercising its franchise in the borough of
Southwark. That borough consisted of three manors,
known respectively as the Guildable Manor, the
King's Manor and the Great Liberty Manor.<note place="foot"><p>Their respective boundaries are set out in the Report of Commissioners
on Municipal Corporations (1837), p. 3.</p></note> The
first of these&mdash;and only the first&mdash;had been granted
to the City by Edward III soon after his accession.
The civic authorities had complained of felons making
good their escape from the city to Southwark, where
they could not be attacked by the officers of the city;
and the king, in answer to the City's request, had made
over to them the town or vill of Southwark.<note place="foot"><p>Charter dated 6 March, 1 Edward III.</p></note> This
grant was afterwards confirmed and amplified by
a charter granted by Edward IV in 1462, whereby
the citizens were allowed to hold a yearly fair in the
borough on three successive days in the month of
September, together with a court of pie-powder, and
with all liberties and customs to such fair appertaining.<note place="foot"><p>Charter dated 9 Nov., 2 Edward IV.</p></note>
In course of time the City claimed the right of holding
a market, as well as the yearly fair, twice a week in<pb n="442" /><anchor id="Pg442" />
Southwark. This claim now led to difficulties with
the king's bailiff, Sir John Gate. A draft agreement
had been drawn up during Somerset's protectorate in
the hopes of arranging matters,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fos. 239b-241b.</p></note> but apparently without
success.</p>

<note place="margin">Charter to the City, 23 April, 1550.</note>

<p>At length the city agreed (29 March, 1550) to make
an offer of 500 marks for the purchase of the rights of
the Crown in Southwark,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 58b.</p></note> and eventually a compromise
was effected. For the sum of £647 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 1<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>
the king conveyed by charter<note place="foot"><p>Dated 23 April, 1550. A fee of £6 "and odde money" was
paid for the enrolment of this charter in the Exchequer.&mdash;Repertory 12,
pt. ii, fo. 458. This fee appears to have been paid, notwithstanding
the express terms of the charter that no fee great or small should be
paid or made or by any means given to the hanaper to the king's use.
According to Wriothesley (ii, 36), the "purchase" of Southwark cost the
city 1,000 marks, "so that nowe they shall have all the whole towne of
Southwarke by letters patent as free as they have the City of London, the
Kinges Place [<hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> Southwark Place or Suffolk House] and the two
prison houses of the Kinges Bench and the Marshalsea excepted."</p></note> to the City of London
divers messuages in Southwark, with the exception of
"Southwark Place" and the gardens belonging to it,
formerly the Duke of Suffolk's mansion, and for a
further sum of 500 marks he surrendered all the royal
liberties and franchises which he or his heirs might
have in the borough or town of Southwark. It was
expressly provided that this charter was not to be
prejudicial to Sir John Gate or to his property and
interests. The ancient rent of £10 per annum was
still to be paid, and the citizens were to be allowed
to hold four markets every week in addition to a fair
and court of pie-powder enjoyed since the time of
Edward IV. On the 9th May the lord mayor took
formal possession of the borough of Southwark by
riding through the precinct, after which the Common
Cryer made proclamation with sound of trumpet for<pb n="443" /><anchor id="Pg443" /><index index="toc" level1="THE WARD OF BRIDGE WITHOUT." />
all vagabonds to leave the city and borough and the
suburbs and liberties of the same.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 38.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The ward of Bridge Without.</note>

<p>It was originally intended, no doubt, that the
borough should be incorporated for all municipal
purposes with the city, and that the inhabitants of
the borough should be placed on the same footing as
the citizens. This, however, was never carried out.
Notwithstanding the fact that among the ordinances
drawn up (31 July) for the government of the
borough,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 80; Journal 16, fo. 82b.</p></note> there was one which prescribed the same
customary procedure in the election of an alderman
for the new ward of Bridge Without as prevailed in
the city;<note place="foot"><p>The custom in the city was for the inhabitants of a vacant ward
to nominate four persons for the Court of Aldermen to select one.  As
there were no means of enforcing the above ordinance it was repealed
by Act of Co. Co., 16 June, 1558.&mdash;Letter Book S., fo. 167b.</p></note> the inhabitants of the borough have never
taken any part in the election of an alderman. The
first alderman, Sir John Aylyff, a barber-surgeon, was
"nominated, elected and chosen" by the Court of
Aldermen,<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 71b. The following particulars of Aylyff and
his family are drawn from the city's archives.  From Bridge Ward
Without he removed to Dowgate Ward. At the time of his death, in
1556, he was keeper of the clothmarket at Blackwell Hall.  His
widow was allowed to take the issues and profits of her late husband's
place for one week, and was forgiven a quarter's rent.  Aylyff's son
Erkenwald succeeded him at Blackwell Hall. The son died in 1561.
After his decease he was convicted of having forged a deed.  His
widow, Dorothy, married Henry Butler, "gentleman."&mdash;Repertory 13,
pt. ii, fos. 442b, 443, 461; Repertory 14, fos. 446b, 477b, 478;
Repertory 16, fo. 6b.</p></note> and was admitted and sworn before the
same body on the 28th May, 1850&mdash;that is to say,
some weeks before the ordinances just mentioned
were drawn up.</p>

<p>The alderman of the ward continued to be
nominated and elected by the Court of Aldermen<pb n="444" /><anchor id="Pg444" />
until 1711, when, by virtue of an Act of Common
Council, the ward was to be offered to the several aldermen
who had served as mayor, in order of seniority. If
no alderman could be found willing to be translated
from his own ward to that of Bridge Without, the
Court of Common Council was empowered by another
Act passed in 1725 to proceed to the election of an
alderman.</p>

<p>The ward of Bridge Without has never sent
representatives to the Common Council, inasmuch as
its inhabitants refused to "take up their freedom"
and bear the burdens of citizenship, and there existed no
means for forcing the freedom upon them. In 1835,
however, a petition was presented to the Common
Council by certain inhabitants of Southwark asking
that they might for the future exercise the right of
electing not only an alderman, but common council-men
for the ward, and that the ordinances of 1550
might be carried out according to their original
intention. The petition was referred to the Committee
for General Purposes, who reported to the
Common Council<note place="foot"><p>Printed Report. Co. Co., 20 May, 1836.</p></note> to the effect that, considering that
the borough of Southwark had never formed part of
the City of London, the charter of Edward VI notwithstanding,
and that the holding of wardmotes in
the borough would materially interfere with the duties
of an ancient officer known as a seneschal or steward
of Southwark, the petition could not be complied with,
except by application to the legislature, and that such
a course would neither be expedient or advisable.
Another petition to the same effect has quite recently<pb n="445" /><anchor id="Pg445" /><index index="toc" level1="UNPOPULARITY OF WARWICK." />
been presented to the Court of Aldermen; but it was
equally unsuccessful.<note place="foot"><p>See Report Committee of the whole Court for General Purposes,
with Appendix, 31 May, 1892 (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Printed</hi>).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Growing unpopularity of Warwick, 1550-1551.</note>

<p>Warwick had not long taken the place of
Somerset before he found himself compelled to make
peace with France (29 March, 1550). This he accomplished
only by consenting to surrender Boulogne.
The declaration of peace was celebrated with bonfires
in the city, although the conditions under which
the peace was effected were generally unacceptable
to the nation and brought discredit upon the earl.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 66. The surrender of Boulogne was "sore
lamented of all Englishmen."&mdash;Wriothesley, ii, 37.</p></note>
One result of the conclusion of the war was again
to flood the streets of the city with men who openly
declared that they neither could nor would work,
and that unless the king provided them with a
livelihood they would combine to plunder the city,
and once clear with their booty they cared not if
10,000 men were after them. It was in vain that
proclamation was made for all disbanded soldiers to
leave the city. They refused to go, and oftentimes
came into conflict with the city constables. At length
the mayor and aldermen addressed a letter on the
subject to the lords of the council (25 Sept.).<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 12, pt. ii, fo. 271b; Letter Book R, fos. 74, 85b;
Journal 16, fos. 66b, 91b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The debasement of the currency, 1551.</note>

<p>In the following year the state of the city was
rendered worse by a proposal of Warwick to debase
the currency yet more. As soon as the proposal got
wind up went the price of provisions, in spite of every
effort made by the lords of the council to keep it
down. They sent for the mayor (Sir Andrew Judd) to<pb n="446" /><anchor id="Pg446" />
attend them at Greenwich on Sunday, the 10th May,
and soundly rated him&mdash;or, as the chronicler puts
it, "gave him some sore words"&mdash;for allowing such
things to take place. On Thursday, the 28th, the
mayor summoned a Common Council, when the
Recorder repeated to them the king's orders that the
price of wares was not to be raised. The livery
companies were to see to it, and there were to be
no more murmurings.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 115; Journal 16, fo. 118.</p></note></p>

<p>Warwick himself excited the anger of the city burgesses
by riding through the streets to see if the king's
orders against the enhancement of the price of victuals
were being carried out. Coming one day to a butcher's
in Eastcheap, he asked the price of a sheep. Being
told that it was 13 shillings, he replied that it was too
much and passed on. When another butcher asked
16 shillings he was told to go and be hanged. The
earl's conduct so roused the indignation of the butchers
of the city&mdash;a class of men scarcely less powerful than
their brethren the fishmongers&mdash;that they made no
secret that the price of meat would be raised still
more if the debasement of the currency was carried
out as proposed.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 48. The price of living became so dear that the
town clerk and the under-sheriffs asked for and obtained from the
Common Council an increase of emoluments.&mdash;Letter Book R, fo. 117b.</p></note> Yet, in spite of all remonstrances
and threats, a proclamation went forth that after the
17th August the shilling should be current for six pence
sterling and no more, the groat for two pence, the
penny for a halfpenny, and the halfpenny for a farthing.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 54.</p></note>
The price of every commodity rose 50 per
cent. as a matter of course, and nothing that Warwick<pb n="447" /><anchor id="Pg447" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FALL OF SOMERSET." />
could do could prevent it. Seeing at last the hopelessness
of attempting to overcome economic laws by
a mere <hi rend="font-style: italic">ipse dixit</hi>, he caused a "contrary proclamasyon"
to be issued, and "sette alle at lyberty agayne, and
every viteler to selle as they wolde and had done
before."<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 72.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Duke of Somerset again arrested, 16 Oct., 1551.</note>

<p>Warwick's increasing unpopularity raised a hope
in the breast of Somerset of recovering his lost power.
Some rash words he had allowed to escape were
carried to the young king, who took the part of
Warwick against his own uncle, and showed his
appreciation of the earl's services by creating him
Duke of Northumberland (11 Oct.). A few days later
Somerset was seized and again committed to the
Tower.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 56; Grey Friars Chron., p. 71.</p></note> The new duke vaunted himself more than
ever, and as a fresh coinage was on the eve of being
issued, he caused it to be struck with a ragged staff,
the badge of his house, on its face.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., pp. 72, 73.</p></note> Some of the
duke's servants thought to ruffle it as well as their
master, and offered an insult to one of the sheriffs,
attempting to snatch at his chain of office as he
accompanied the mayor to service at St. Paul's on
All Saints' Day, and otherwise creating no little
disturbance in St. Paul's Churchyard. The mayor
waited until service was over, and then took them
into custody.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pp. 71, 72.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Trial and execution of Somerset, 22 Jan., 1552.</note>

<p>At the time of Somerset's second arrest the
Common Council and the wardens of the several
livery companies were summoned to meet at the
Guildhall to hear why the duke had been sent for the<pb n="448" /><anchor id="Pg448" />
second time to the Tower, and to receive instructions
for safe-guarding the city. They were informed by the
Recorder that it had been the duke's intention to seize
the Tower and the Isle of Wight, and to "have destroyed
the city of London and the substantiall men
of the same."<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 57.</p></note> This was, of course, an exaggeration,
although there is little doubt that the duke was preparing
to get himself named again Protector by the
next parliament. On the 1st December he was
brought from the Tower by water to Westminster,
the mayor and aldermen having received strict orders
to keep the city well guarded.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 12, pt. ii, fo. 426; Letter Book R, fo. 157b.</p></note> He was arraigned of
treason and felony, but his judges, among whom sat
his enemy Northumberland himself, acquitted him of
the former charge, and those in the hall, thinking he
had been altogether acquitted, raised a shout of joy
that could be heard as far as Charing Cross and Long
Acre. When they discovered that he had been found
guilty of felony and condemned to be executed they
were grievously disappointed. As he landed at the
Crane in the Vintry on his way back to the Tower
that evening, and passed through Candlewick (Cannon)
Street, the people, we are told, cried "'God save him'
all the way as he went, thinkinge that he had clerely
bene quitt, but they were deceyved, but hoopinge
he should have the kinge's pardon."<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 63.</p></note> According to
another chronicler there were mingled cries of joy and
sorrow as he passed through London, some crying for
joy that he was acquitted, whilst others (who were
better informed of the actual state of the case)<pb n="449" /><anchor id="Pg449" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE ROYAL HOSPITALS." />
lamented his conviction.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iii, 1032.</p></note> His execution took place
on Tower Hill in January of the next year (1552).</p>

<note place="margin">The City and the Royal Hospitals, 1547-1553.</note>

<p>In the meanwhile the civic authorities had been
energetically engaged in making regulations for the
hospital of the poor in West Smithfield, better known
as St. Bartholomew's Hospital, which they had recently
acquired, and in grappling with the poverty and sickness
with which they were surrounded. Instead of
trusting to the charity of those attending the parish
churches on Sunday for raising money for the poor,
the Common Council, in September, 1547, resorted to
the less precarious method of levying on every inhabitant
of the city one half of a fifteenth for the maintenance
of the poor of the hospital.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 325b; Letter Book Q, fo. 214b.</p></note> The voluntary
system, however, was not wholly abolished. In the
following April (1548) a brotherhood for the relief of
the poor had been established, to which the mayor (Sir
John Gresham) and most of the aldermen belonged,
each agreeing to subscribe a yearly sum varying from
half a mark to a mark.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 237; Repertory 11, fo. 445b.</p></note> In September governors
were appointed of St. Bartholomew's Hospital&mdash;four
aldermen and eight commoners<note place="foot"><p>Journal 15, fo. 384.</p></note>&mdash;and in the following
December the Common Council passed an Act for the
payment of 500 marks a year to the hospital, the sum
being levied on the livery companies.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book Q, fo. 261b; Journal 15, fos. 398, 401; Appendix vii
to "Memoranda of the Royal Hospitals," pp. 46-51.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">St. Thomas's Hospital.</note>

<p>In 1551 the City succeeded in obtaining another
hospital. This was the hospital in Southwark originally
dedicated to Thomas Becket, but whose patron<pb n="450" /><anchor id="Pg450" />
saint was, after the Reformation, changed to St.
Thomas the Apostle. Negotiations were opened in
February with the lord chancellor for the purchase of
this hospital.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 12, pt. ii., fos. 311, 312b.</p></note> They proceeded so favourably that by
the 12th August the hospital and church and part of
their endowment were conveyed to the City by deed,
whilst the rest of the endowment was transferred by
another deed on the following day.<note place="foot"><p>Both deeds are printed in Supplement to Memoranda relating to
Royal Hospitals, pp. 15-32.</p></note> The purchase-money
amounted to nearly £2,500.</p>

<note place="margin">Christ's Hospital.</note>

<p>Having thus cared for the sick and the poor, the
civic authorities next turned their attention to the
conversion of a portion of the ground and buildings
of the dissolved monastery of the Grey Friars into a
hospital for the reception and education of fatherless
and helpless children. In 1552 Sir Richard Dobbs<note place="foot"><p>Son of Robert Dobbs, of Batley, Yorks. Alderman of Tower
Ward. Knighted 8 May, 1552. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ob.</hi> 1556. Buried in Church of
St. Margaret Moses.&mdash;Machyn, pp. 105, 269, 349; Wriothesley, ii, 69.</p></note>
was mayor. He took an active part in the charitable
work that was then being carried on in the city, and
his conduct so won the heart of Ridley that the
bishop wrote from prison shortly before his death
commending him in the highest possible terms:&mdash;"O
Dobbs, Dobbs, alderman and knight, thou in thy
year did'st win my heart for evermore, for that
honourable act, that most blessed work of God,
of the erection and setting up of Christ's Holy
Hospitals, and truly religious houses which by thee
and through thee were begun." In July the work
of adapting the old buildings, rather than erecting
new, was commenced, and in a few months the<pb n="451" /><anchor id="Pg451" /><index index="toc" level1="ALDERMAN DOBBS AND CHRIST'S HOSPITAL." />
premises were sufficiently forward to admit of the
reception of nearly 400 children. The charity was
aided by the king's bestowal of the linen vestures
used in the city prior to the Reformation, and at that
time seized by the commissioners.<note place="foot"><p>Report, Charity Commissioners, No. 32, pt. vi, p. 75; Strype,
Stow's "Survey," bk. i, p. 176.</p></note> Just as the close
of the reign of Henry VIII had witnessed the reopening
of the church of the Grey Friars under the
name of Christchurch, and the celebration of the
mass once more within its walls, so now the close of
his son's short reign witnessed the restoration of their
house and buildings, and their conversion, in the cause
of education and charity, into Christ's Hospital.</p>

<note place="margin">Bridewell Hospital.</note>

<p>There was yet another class of inhabitant to
be provided for, namely, those who either could not
or would not work. On behalf of these a deputation<note place="foot"><p>Among the names of those forming the deputation appears that
of Richard Grafton, whose printing house, from which issued "The
Prymer"&mdash;one of the earliest books of private devotion printed in
English as well as Latin&mdash;was situate within the precinct of the Old
Grey Friars.&mdash;Repertory 12, p. ii., fos. 271b, 272b.</p></note>
was appointed by the City to present a petition to
the king that he would be pleased to grant the
disused palace of Bridewell to the municipality for
the purpose of turning it into a workhouse. The
deputation was introduced by Ridley, who himself
wrote in May of this year (1552) to secretary Cecil
on the same subject.<note place="foot"><p>Strype, Stow's "Survey," bk. i, p. 176.</p></note> The efforts of the bishop and
the deputation were rewarded with success. In the
following spring (1553) the king not only consented
to convey the palace to the municipal body, but
further gave 700 marks and all the beds and bedding
of his palace of the Savoy for the maintenance of<pb n="452" /><anchor id="Pg452" />
the workhouse.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, 83; Repertory 13, fo. 60.</p></note> The City having thus become
possessed of the several hospitals of St. Bartholomew,
St. Thomas, Christ's and Bridewell, the king, a few
days before his death, granted the mayor, aldermen
and commonalty a charter of incorporation as
governors of these Royal Hospitals in the city.<note place="foot"><p>Charter dated 26 June, 1553.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="453" /><anchor id="Pg453" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XVI.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="NORTHUMBERLAND'S CONSPIRACY, 1553." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">Northumberland's conspiracy, 1553.</note>

<p>The death of Edward VI took place on the 6th
July, 1553, although it was not generally known until
two days afterwards. By his father's will the Princess
Mary became heiress to the throne. Northumberland
was aware of this. He was equally aware that if
Mary succeeded to her brother's crown matters might
go hard with him. He therefore persuaded Edward
to follow the precedent set by his father and re-settle
the succession to the crown by will. He succeeded
moreover in getting the late king to name as his successor
the Lady Jane Grey, grand-daughter of Mary
Duchess of Suffolk, the younger sister of Henry VIII,
and he took the further precaution of marrying her to
his own son, Lord Guildford Dudley. It was in vain
that the judges and law officers of the Crown pointed
out that the Act of Parliament which authorised
Henry to dispose of the crown by will, in the case of
his children dying without heirs, did not apply to
Edward. Councillors and judges, and even Cranmer
himself, were forced to signify their assent by subscribing
to the will, which was dated (21 June) a
fortnight only before Edward's death.</p>

<p>Northumberland well knew the advantage to be
got by securing the co-operation of the city in prosecuting
his scheme, so he persuaded the mayor (Sir George
Barnes), a number of aldermen (including Sir John
Gresham, Sir Andrew Judd, Thomas Offley and Sir<pb n="454" /><anchor id="Pg454" />
Richard Dobbs), and several of the leading merchants
of the city to append their signatures to the will.<note place="foot"><p>"Letters Patent for the limitation of the Crown," sometimes
called the "counterfeit will" of King Edward VI.&mdash;Chron. of Q. Jane
and Q. Mary (Camd. Soc., No. 48), pp. 91-100.</p></note>
The king had been already dead two days before
Northumberland sent for them to Greenwich and
acquainted them of the fact, exhorting them at the
same time to sign the document.<note place="foot"><p>Richard Hilles to Henry Bullinger, 9 July, 1553.&mdash;"Original
letters relative to the English Reformation" (Parker Soc.), pp. 272-274.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Lady Jane Grey proclaimed queen, 10 July, 1553.</note>

<p>On the 10th July the Lady Jane was brought from
Richmond and lodged in the Tower, and that same
evening was proclaimed queen at the Cross in Chepe.
The mayor took no part in the ceremony, and only
one of the sheriffs (William Gerard or Garrard)
attended the heralds. If Northumberland thought
that the citizens would favour Lady Jane merely
because she was a Protestant he was mistaken. The
proclamation was received with undisguised coldness,
and "few or none said God save her."<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., pp. 78, 79.</p></note> Nor was it
better received by the country at large. The eastern
counties rose and in a few days Mary was at the
head of 30,000 men. No time was to be lost, and
Northumberland at once set out from London to
meet her. As he passed through the city he noticed
that none wished him "God speed."</p>

<note place="margin">Queen Mary proclaimed, 19 July.</note>

<p>No sooner was his back turned than the lords
of the council, seeing how matters were going, and
eager to throw off the yoke which the duke had
placed on their necks, determined upon proclaiming
Mary queen. It was necessary, however, that the
City should first be informed of their intention, and<pb n="455" /><anchor id="Pg455" /><index index="toc" level1="MARY PROCLAIMED QUEEN IN THE CITY." />
that, too, without creating too much attention. One
of their number therefore took the opportunity of
the mayor riding abroad on Wednesday, the 19th
July, to accost him privately and bid him and the
sheriffs, and such of the aldermen as he could
get together at short notice, to meet the lords
of the council within an hour at the Earl of
Pembroke's place at Castle Baynard. The mayor
hurried back, sent for the Recorder and some of the
aldermen, and with them proceeded to the place
appointed, where they found the council assembled.
They were informed of the intention of the lords, and
the mayor was bidden to accompany them to Cheapside
for the purpose of proclaiming Queen Mary.
Their object soon got wind; a crowd followed them
to Cheapside, and when the proclamation was made
there was such a throwing up of caps and such cries
of "God save Queen Mary" that nothing else could be
heard. The civic authorities, as well as the lords of
the council, thereupon proceeded to St. Paul's to hear
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">Te Deum</hi>; after which the lords withdrew from the
city, leaving orders, however, for Queen Mary to be
proclaimed in other parts of the city according to
custom. The next day (20 July) they returned and
dined with the mayor, sitting in council, after dinner,
until four o'clock in the afternoon, whilst the church
bells rang all day long.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 88-90.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Northumberland sent to the Tower, 25 July.</note>

<p>As soon as Northumberland heard of the turn
affairs had taken, he caused Mary to be proclaimed
at Cambridge, where he happened to be quartered,
"castinge up his capp after as if he had bene joyfull
of it." His simulated enthusiasm, however, availed<pb n="456" /><anchor id="Pg456" />
him nothing, and orders were issued for his arrest.
Special precautions were taken to avoid disturbance
on the day (25 July) that he passed through the city
on his way to the Tower, every householder in the
several wards through which he and his fellow
prisoners were to pass being instructed to hold himself
in readiness within doors with a clean halberd, and a
bill or "pollox" for such service as the alderman
might appoint.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 262b; Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 68.</p></note> No disturbance took place, the
populace contenting itself with cursing the duke and
calling him traitor, and making him take off his hat as
he passed through Bishopsgate and continue his
journey bareheaded.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 90, 91; Grey Friars Chron., p. 81.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Queen Mary enters the city. 3 Aug.</note>

<p>On the evening of the 3rd August Queen Mary
made her first entry into the city, accompanied by
her sister Elizabeth. She had come from Newhall,
in Essex, where a few days before she had been
presented with the sum of £500 in gold by a
deputation of the Court of Aldermen accompanied by
the Recorder.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 69.</p></note> On the 2nd August it was decided
that the lord mayor and his brethren should ride out
the next afternoon to meet her majesty at the Bars
without Aldgate, and taking their places appointed by
the herald-of-arms, should accompany the royal procession.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 70b.</p></note>
The reception which the new queen met
with in the city must have been gratifying. The
mayor, on approaching her, handed to her the civic
sword, which was given to the Earl of Arundel to
carry before her. The mayor himself bore the mace.
By express permission of the Court of Aldermen a<pb n="457" /><anchor id="Pg457" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MASS RESTORED." />
number of Florentine and other merchant strangers
were allowed to attend on horseback, and to erect a
pageant at Leadenhall.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 69b.</p></note> The whole length of the
streets through which the queen had to pass on her
way to the Tower had been lavishly decorated, and
was lined with members of the various civic companies
in their livery gowns. Nothing was omitted that
could please the eye or ear.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, 93-95.</p></note></p>

<p>A touching scene took place as Mary was about
to enter the Tower. The widow of the Duke of
Somerset, to whose policy as protector Mary had
offered a steady opposition, met the queen at the
Tower gate, and in company with the Duke of
Norfolk, Stephen Gardiner and others, who had been
confined in the Tower in the late reign, knelt down
and saluted her. Mary, in a charitable mood, kissed
each of them, claimed them as her own prisoners, and
shortly afterwards granted them their liberty.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, p. 14; Wriothesley, ii, 95.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Mary releases the bishops and restores the mass.</note>

<p>A week later (10 Aug.) the remains of the late
king were carried from Whitehall to Westminster and
laid in Henry the Seventh's Chapel, the service
being conducted wholly in English, the communion
taking the place of the mass, and the priests being
vested in a surplice only, in accordance with the provisions
of the Book of Common Prayer. For a short
time after Mary's accession it was thought that she
would be content if the Church were restored to the
position it was in at the time when Henry VIII died.
It was not long before the new queen shewed this
opinion to be erroneous. The Prayer Book of King<pb n="458" /><anchor id="Pg458" />
Edward VI was set aside, the high altars that had
been removed were restored, and mass was restored.
Ridley was sent to the Tower and Bonner brought out
from the Marshalsea and reinstated in the bishophric
of London. Gardiner, who had been deprived of his
see of Winchester and kept prisoner in the Tower, not
only recovered his freedom and his see, but was made
the queen's chancellor. On the other hand, Cranmer
and "Mr. Latimer" were sent to the Tower.</p>

<note place="margin">Disturbances in the city.</note>

<p>The change that was being wrought caused some
little disturbance in the city. When Doctor Bourne,
who had been put up by the queen to preach at
Paul's Cross one Sunday in August, began to pray for
the dead, and to refer to Bonner's late imprisonment,
one of his hearers threw a knife at him whilst others
called the preacher a liar. The queen was so angry
at this that she sent for the mayor and aldermen and
told them plainly that she would deprive the city
of its liberties if they could not better preserve peace
and good order within its walls.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 83; Wriothesley, ii, 96-98.</p></note></p>

<p>A few days later she issued a proclamation in
which, whilst making no secret of her wish that
everyone would conform to the religion "which all
men knew she had of long tyme observed, and ment,
God willing, to contynue the same," she deprecated
men calling each other heretic or papist, but willed
that everyone should follow the religion he thought
best until further orders were taken.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, p. 24.</p></note> The mayor in
the meantime had also issued his precept against any
sermon or lecture being read other than the Divine<pb n="459" /><anchor id="Pg459" /><index index="toc" level1="CORONATION OF QUEEN MARY." />
Service appointed until the queen's further pleasure
should be made known.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book R, fo. 270; Journal 16, fo. 261b.</p></note></p>

<p>Lest any disturbance should arise on the following
Sunday (20 Aug.), when Bishop Gardiner's chaplain
was to preach at Paul's Cross, the queen sent the
captain of the guard with 200 men, who surrounded
the pulpit, halberd in hand. The mayor, too, had
ordered the livery companies to be present "to
herken yf any leude or sedicious persons made any
rumors"&mdash;a precaution which much pleased the
queen.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 99, 100; Holinshed, iv, 3.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Election of Thomas White mayor, 29 Sept., 1553.</note>

<p>When Michaelmas-day (the day on which the
election of the new mayor for the ensuing year was
to take place) came round, the choice of the citizens
fell upon Sir Thomas White.<note place="foot"><p>Citizen and Merchant Taylor. Son of William White, of Reading,
and formerly of Rickmansworth. Founder of St. John's College,
Oxford, and principal benefactor of Merchant Taylors' School. Alderman
of Cornhill Ward; when first elected alderman he declined to
accept office and was committed to Newgate for contumacy (Letter
Book Q, fo. 109b; Repertory 11, fo. 80b). Sheriff 1547. Knighted
at Whitehall 10 Dec., 1553 (Wriothesley, ii, 105). His first wife, Avice
(surname unknown), died 26 Feb., 1588, and was buried in the church
of St. Mary Aldermary. He afterwards married Joan, daughter of
John Lake and widow of Sir Ralph Warren, twice Mayor of London.
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Ob.</hi> 11 Feb., 1566, at Oxford, aged 72.&mdash;Clode, "Early Hist. Guild of
Merchant Taylors," pt. ii, chaps. x-xii; Machyn's Diary, pp. 167,
330, 363.</p></note> In accordance with
the new order of things, the election was preceded by
the celebration of mass in the Guildhall Chapel as
of old.</p>

<note place="margin">The queen's coronation, 1 Oct.</note>

<p>The day after the election of the new mayor
the queen passed through the city from the Tower
to Whitehall for her coronation. The streets presented
their usual gay appearance on this occasion,
and the queen was made the recipient of the<pb n="460" /><anchor id="Pg460" />
"accustomed" gift of 1,000 marks on behalf of the
city.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 261; Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 74b.</p></note> On the day of the coronation (1 Oct.) the
daily service at St. Paul's had to be suspended
because all the priests not under censure for Protestantism
or for having married were summoned to
assist at Westminster.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 84.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Mary's first parliament, Oct.-Nov., 1553.</note>

<p>When Mary appeared before her first parliament<note place="foot"><p>Met in October, 1553. The names of the city's representatives
are not recorded. The Court of Aldermen, according to a custom then
prevalent, authorized the city chamberlain to make a gift of £6 13<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>
to Sir John Pollard, the Speaker, "for his lawfull favor to be borne
and shewed in the parlyment howse towardes this cytie and theyre
affayres theire."&mdash;Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 92.</p></note>
she found her subjects in many points opposed to her.
They were willing to restore the worship and practice
of the Church as they existed before the death of
Henry VIII, but they showed a determination neither
to submit to Rome nor to restore to the Church the
property of which it had been deprived. They knew,
moreover, of her anxious wish to marry Philip, son of
the emperor Charles V, and yet did not hesitate to
present to her a petition against a foreign marriage.
It was a bold step for parliament to take in those
days, and showed that it was determined to win back
its ancient rights and no longer to be the tool of the
crown. Mary was not one likely to yield in a matter
on which she had once set her heart. Rather than
take its advice she dissolved parliament. The result
was an insurrection.</p>

<note place="margin">Trial at the Guildhall of Lady Jane Grey, Cranmer and others, Nov., 1553.</note>

<p>In the meanwhile the aged Cranmer and the
youthful Lady Jane Grey&mdash;she "that wolde a been
qwene"&mdash;her husband and two of her husband's
brothers had been brought to trial at the Guildhall<pb n="461" /><anchor id="Pg461" /><index index="toc" level1="WYATT'S REBELLION." />
(13 Nov). The axe was borne before them on their
way from the Tower, as if in anticipation of the
verdict. The Lady Jane is described as clad in a black
gown, with velvet cap and black hood, having a black
velvet book hanging at her girdle, whilst she carried
another in her hand.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 85; Wriothesley, ii, 104; Chron. Q. Jane
and Q. Mary, p. 32. There is preserved in the British Museum a small
manual of prayers believed to have been used by Lady Jane Grey on
the scaffold. The tiny volume (Harl. MS., 2342) measures only
3-1/2 inches by 2-3/4 inches, and contains on the margin lines addressed to
Sir John Gage, lieutenant of the Tower, and to her father, the Duke
of Suffolk.</p></note> Each of the accused pleaded
guilty, and sentence of death was passed; its execution
was, however, delayed owing to the outbreak known
as Wyatt's Rebellion.</p>

<note place="margin">Outbreak of Wyatt's Rebellion. Jan., 1554.</note>

<p>The ostensible cause of the rebellion was the
queen's determination at all hazards to marry Philip,
whose ambassadors arrived at the opening of the new
year (1554). The civic authorities had been warned
to treat them handsomely, a warning which was
scarcely necessary, for the citizens have never allowed
political differences to interfere with their hospitality;
and accordingly one of the ambassadors was lodged
at Durham Place, near Charing Cross, another at the
Duke of Suffolk's house hard by, whilst a third
shared apartments with the chancellor "Nigro"
(Philip Negri) in Sir Richard Sackville's house at
the conduit in Fleet Street. To each and all of
the guests the City sent presents of wax, torches,
flour and every kind of meat, game and poultry.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 283.</p></note>
Formal announcement of the intended match was
made by the chancellor on the 14th January, but
it was received with every sign of discontent and
misgiving, "yea and therat allmost eche man was<pb n="462" /><anchor id="Pg462" />
abashed, loking daylie for worse mattiers to growe
shortly after."<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, 35.</p></note> The following day (15 Jan.)&mdash;the
day on which the rebellion under Wyatt broke
out in Kent, to be followed by risings in Devonshire
and Norfolk&mdash;the mayor and aldermen were summoned
to court and ordered to bring with them forty
of the chief commoners of the city, when the lord
chancellor informed them of the queen's intention,
and exhorted them as obedient subjects to accept her
grace's pleasure and to remain content and quiet. He
warned them, at the same time, to see that the
queen's wishes respecting religious services in the city
were strictly carried out, on pain of incurring her high
indignation.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 106.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city put into a state of defence.</note>

<p>Steps were taken for putting the city into a proper
state of defence. The civic companies were ordered
to set watches as on similar critical occasions, and
no gunpowder, weapons or other munitions of war
were allowed to be sent out of the city. Chains were
set up at the bridge-foot and at the corner of New
Fish Street. The borough of Southwark was called
upon to provide eighty tall and able men, well
harnessed and weaponed, for the safeguard of the
queen's person and of the city,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fos. 116, 116b, 117, 117b, 119-122b.</p></note> whilst the livery
companies at a few hours' notice furnished a force of
500 men to be speedily despatched by water to
Gravesend.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 107.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The queen's speech at the Guildhall, 1 Feb., 1554.</note>

<p>Whatever faults Queen Mary had, she was by no
means deficient in courage. On the same day (1 Feb.)
that Wyatt appeared with his forces at Southwark,<pb n="463" /><anchor id="Pg463" /><index index="toc" level1="QUEEN MARY AT THE GUILDHALL." />
she came to the Guildhall<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 121.</p></note> and there addressed a
spirited harangue to the assembled citizens.<note place="foot"><p>Foxe's "Acts and Monuments," vi, 414-415; Holinshed, iv, 16.</p></note> She
plainly told them that her proposed marriage was but
a Spanish cloak to cover the real purpose of the
rebellion, which was aimed against her religion. She
was their queen, and they had sworn allegiance to
her; they surely would not allow her to fall into the
hands of so vile a traitor as Wyatt was. As for her
marriage, it had been arranged with the full knowledge
of the lords of the council, as one of expediency for
the realm. Passion had no part in the matter. She had
hitherto, she thanked God, lived a virgin, and doubted
not she could, if necessary, live so still. At the close
of her speech, which, we are told, was delivered in
a loud voice so that all might hear, she bade the
citizens to pluck up heart and not to fear the rebels
any more than she did. She then quitted the hall
and went up into the aldermen's council chamber and
there refreshed herself, after which she rode through
Bucklersbury to the Vintry, where she took barge to
Westminster.</p>

<p>In the meantime the Spanish ambassadors had
taken fright at Wyatt's approach and had "sped
themselves awaie by water, and that with all hast."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iv, 15.</p></note>
Many inhabitants of the city had also deserted their
fellow burgesses at this critical time, and their names
were submitted to the Court of Aldermen for subsequent
enquiry.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 124.</p></note> They were, according to Foxe,
afraid of being entrapped by the queen and perhaps
put to death.</p>

<pb n="464" /><anchor id="Pg464" />

<note place="margin">A force of 1,000 men raised in the city.</note>

<p>In response to the queen's speech the citizens at
once set to work to raise a force of 1,000 men for the
defence of the city, the mayor and aldermen each in
his own ward taking a muster. So busy was everyone
on Candlemas-day (2 Feb.) that the civic
authorities omitted to attend the afternoon service at
St. Paul's, and the mayor's serving-men waited upon
him at dinner ready harnessed.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, iii, 109.</p></note> Even the lawyers
at Westminster "pleaded in harness."<note place="foot"><p>Stow.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Wyatt and his followers before Ludgate.</note>

<note place="margin">Wyatt made prisoner and lodged in the Tower.</note>

<p>The defensive precautions taken by the mayor
and aldermen were sufficient to prevent Wyatt making
good his entry into the city by Southwark and London
Bridge. Foiled in this direction he sought to approach
the city from another side, but had to march as far as
Kingston before he could cross the Thames. Many
of his followers in the meantime deserted him.<note place="foot"><p>Foxe's "Acts and Monuments," vi, 415.</p></note>
Nevertheless he continued to make his way, with
but little opposition, to Ludgate, which, contrary to
his expectation, he found shut in his face. He had
been recognised by a tailor of Watling Street, who
seeing the force approaching cried, "I know that theys
be Wyettes ancienttes," and forthwith closed the
gate.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 87.</p></note> That Wyatt had supporters in the city may be
gathered from the half-hearted opposition that he met
with in Southwark, as well as from the fact that many
of the soldiers raised in the city and neighbourhood
deserted to Wyatt at the outset of the rebellion.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, p. 43; Wriothesley, iii, 107, 108.</p></note>
Wyatt himself exhibited no little disappointment
at finding Ludgate closed against him instead of the<pb n="465" /><anchor id="Pg465" /><index index="toc" level1="SUPPRESSION OF THE REBELLION." />
aid which he evidently had expected. "I have kept
touch" said he, as he turned his back on the city.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 87.</p></note>
He had scarcely reached Temple Bar before he was
overcome by a superior force and yielded himself a
prisoner. After a short stay at Whitehall he was
removed to the Tower.</p>

<note place="margin">Execution of Lady Jane Grey, Wyatt and others.</note>

<p>The failure of the revolt was fatal to Lady
Jane Grey, and she was beheaded within the Tower
(12 Feb.) almost at the same time that her husband
was being executed outside on Tower Hill. By the
strange irony of fortune, it fell to the lot of Thomas
Offley to perform the duties of sheriff at Dudley's
execution, although he had himself been one of the
supporters of the Lady Jane in her claim to the crown.
For the next few days the city presented a sad
spectacle; whichever way one turned there was to be
seen a gibbet with its wretched burden, whilst the
city's gates bristled with human heads.<note place="foot"><p>Machyn, 45. The gibbets remained standing till the following
June, when they were taken down in anticipation of Philip's public
entry into London.&mdash;Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, 76.</p></note> Wyatt himself
was one of the last to suffer, being brought to the
block on Tower Hill on the 11th April. His head
and a portion of his body, after being exposed on
gallows, were taken away by his friends for decent
burial.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 89.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Measures for preserving the peace.</note>

<p>On the 17th February proclamation was made
for all strangers to leave the realm, on the ground
that they sowed the seeds of their "malycyouse
doctryne and lewde conversacioun" among the queen's
good subjects;<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 283; Letter Book R, fo. 288.</p></note> and this had been followed in the city<pb n="466" /><anchor id="Pg466" />
by precepts to each alderman to call before him all
the householders of his ward, both rich and poor, on
Wednesday the 7th March, at six o'clock in the morning,
and strictly charge them that they, their wives,
their children and servants behave themselves in all
things and more especially in matters of religion,
following the example of the queen herself. All
offenders were to be reported forthwith.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 131.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The lord mayor before the Star Chamber.</note>

<p>A report having got abroad in the city that the
lords of the council had endeavoured to extract a
confession from Wyatt implicating the Princess Elizabeth
in the late rebellion, the mayor was ordered
by Bishop Gardiner to bring up the originator of the
rumour before the Star Chamber. When Sir Thomas
White appeared with the culprit, one Richard Cut by
name, a servant to a grocer in the city, he was soundly
rated by Gardiner for not having himself punished the
offender, and when he replied that the party was
there present for the Star Chamber to deal with
according to its pleasure, was again rebuked:&mdash;"My
lord, take heed to your charge, the Citie of London
is a whirlepoole and a sinke of evill rumors, there
they be bred, and from thence spred into all parts
of the realme."<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iv, 26.</p></note> Cut paid the penalty for his love
of gossip by being made to stand two days in the
pillory and by the loss of his ears.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 153; Letter Book R, fo. 293.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Demand of money from the city, 1554.</note>

<p>The suppression of the revolt left Mary at liberty
to carry out her matrimonial design. But before
accomplishing this she was determined to place such
a garrison in or near London as should prevent similar<pb n="467" /><anchor id="Pg467" /><index index="toc" level1="MEN AND MONEY DEMANDED OF THE CITY." />
outbreaks in future. For this purpose she applied to
the citizens for a sum of 6,000 marks. Thus called
upon to supply a rod for their own backs, the citizens
demurred. They at first proposed to offer the sum of
1,000 marks, or at the most £1,000; they afterwards
agreed to contribute double the first mentioned sum,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 130; Journal 16, fo. 284b.</p></note>
and this was accepted. The money was raised by
contributions from the different livery companies, the
Merchant Taylors, the Mercers, the Grocers, the
Drapers, the Fishmongers, the Goldsmiths, and the
Haberdashers being called upon to subscribe the sum
of £100 respectively, whilst the rest of the companies
paid sums varying from £80 to forty shillings.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 138b.</p></note> No
sooner had the citizens satisfied the queen in this
respect than they were called upon to send 200
soldiers to Gillingham, in Kent, there to be embarked
for foreign service under the Lord Admiral. The City
again demurred, and asked to be excused the necessity
of forwarding the men beyond Billingsgate or the
Tower Wharf and also of providing them with
accoutrements. It was to no purpose, both men and
accoutrements had to be found.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 142b, 146b.</p></note> On the 10th April
the chamberlain received orders to see that the city's
artillery was in readiness and to increase the store of
gunpowder.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 147.</p></note> Wyatt was to be executed the next
day, and these orders were probably given in anticipation
of a disturbance.</p>

<note place="margin">Trial at the Guildhall of Nicholas Throckmorton, 17 April.</note>

<p>That Wyatt still had friends in the city is shown
by the bold attitude taken up by the jury in the
trial (17 April) of one of his accomplices, Nicholas
Throckmorton, against whom they brought in a<pb n="468" /><anchor id="Pg468" />
verdict of not guilty.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 115.</p></note> For this they were bound
over to appear before the Star Chamber. Four of the
twelve made submission; the rest, among whom were
Thomas Whetstone, a haberdasher, and Emanuel
Lucar, a merchant tailor, were committed some to
the Tower and the rest to the Fleet, where they
remained for six months. In the meantime the
Court of Aldermen wrote (19 July) to the council in
their favour, but with little success.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 186b.</p></note> A month later
(19 August) a deputation waited on the Court of
Aldermen for advice as to what future steps had
best be taken for obtaining the release of their
brethren in the Fleet, when they were told that the
wives of the prisoners or the prisoners' friends should
first make suit to the council for their release, after
which the court would see what they could do.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 190b.</p></note> At
length the prisoners were summoned once more
(26 Oct.) before the Star Chamber, when they one
and all declared that they had only acted in accordance
with their conscience, whilst Lucar, more outspoken
than the rest, asserted that "they had done in the
matter like honest men and true and faithful subjects."
Such plain speaking ill suited the judges, who thereupon
condemned the offenders to a fine of 1,000
marks apiece and imprisonment until further order.
Eventually five out of the eight were discharged
(12 December) on payment of a fine of £220, and ten
days later the rest regained their liberty on payment
of £60 apiece.<note place="foot"><p>Howell's "State Trials," i, 901, 902; Chron. of Q. Jane and
Q. Mary, p. 75.</p></note></p>

<pb n="469" /><anchor id="Pg469" /><index index="toc" level1="THE QUEEN'S MARRIAGE." />

<note place="margin">The queen's marriage, July, 1554.</note>

<p>A parliament which met in April (1554)<note place="foot"><p>It sat from 2 April until 5 May.&mdash;Wriothesley, ii, 114, 115. The
city returned the same members that had served in the last parliament
of Edward VI, namely, Martin Bowes, Broke the Recorder, John Marsh
and John Blundell.</p></note> gave its
consent to Mary's marriage with Philip, but refused
to re-enact the old statutes for the persecution of
heretics. On the 19th July Philip landed at Southampton,
and on the 21st Mary herself notified
the event to the citizens of London,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 295b.</p></note> who for
some time past had been making preparations for
giving both queen and king a fitting reception, and
who immediately on receipt of the news of Philip's
landing caused bonfires to be lighted in the streets.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fos. 165, 166, 166b, 170.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The passage of the king and queen through the city, 19 Aug.</note>

<p>Mary rode down to Winchester to meet Philip,<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, p. 77.</p></note>
and on the 25th became his wife. It was not until
the 17th August that the royal pair approached
the city. On that day they came by water from Richmond
to Southwark, the king in one barge, the queen
in another. After taking refreshment at the Bishop
of Winchester's palace, and killing a buck or two in
the bishop's park, they retired to rest.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 78.</p></note> Special
orders were given to the aldermen to keep a good
and substantial double watch in the city from nine
o'clock in the evening (17 Aug.) until five o'clock the
next morning, such watch to continue until further
notice.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 263.</p></note> The authorities differ widely as to the
precise day on which the royal party passed through
the city. The city's own records point to the afternoon
of Sunday the 19th August as the day. On the
morning of that day the Court of Aldermen sat, and<pb n="470" /><anchor id="Pg470" />
a letter from the queen commending them for their
forwardness in "making shewes of honour and gladnes"
for the occasion was read to the wardens of all
the companies for them to communicate to the
members. The wardens were further enjoined to
give strict orders to the members of their several
companies to honestly use and entreat the Spaniards
in all things, both at their coming in with the king
and queen and ever afterwards. The same morning
a speech which the Recorder had prepared for the
occasion in English was handed over to the master of
St. Paul's School to be turned into Latin. None too
much time was allowed the worthy pedagogue for
the purpose, for he was to give it back that same
afternoon so that the Recorder might "make and
pronounce yt to the kinges majesty at his comynge
in."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 191. A full account of the pageants, etc.,
will be found in John Elder's letter.&mdash;Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary,
Appendix <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">X</hi>.</p></note></p>

<p>A curious incident is related in connection with
the royal procession through the city. The conduit
in Gracious Church Street, which had been newly
painted and gilded, bore representations of the "nine
worthies," and among them Henry the Eighth and
Edward the Sixth. Instead of carrying a sword or
mace like the rest, Henry had been portrayed with a
sceptre in one hand and a book bearing the inscription
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Verbum Dei</hi> in the other. This catching the eye of
Bishop Gardiner as he passed in the royal train, he
was very wroth and sent for the painter, asked him
by whose orders he had so depicted the king, called
him "traitor" and threatened him with the Fleet<pb n="471" /><anchor id="Pg471" /><index index="toc" level1="RECONCILIATION WITH THE POPE." />
prison. The poor painter, who for the first time had
been made to realise the change that was taking
place, pleaded that what he had done had been done
in all innocence, and hastened to rectify his mistake
by removing the bible from the picture and substituting
in its place a pair of gloves.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, pp. 78-79.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The reconciliation with Rome, 1554.</note>

<p>In November (1554) a new parliament<note place="foot"><p>Martin Bowes, of the old members, alone continued to sit for the
city, the places of the other members being taken by Ralph Cholmeley,
who had succeeded Broke as Recorder; Richard Grafton, the printer;
and Richard Burnell.</p></note> was
called, which proved more ready than the last to
comply with the queen's wishes. It re-enacted the
statutes for burning heretics and agreed to a reconciliation
of the Church of England with the See
of Rome, but it refused to sanction the surrender
of Church lands. Bonner had already taken steps
to purge his diocese of heresy by issuing a series
of articles (14 Sept.) to which every inhabitant,
clerical and lay, was expected to conform.<note place="foot"><p>Chron. of Q. Jane and Q. Mary, 82; Wriothesley, 122.</p></note> That
there was room for improvement in matters touching
religion and public decorum there is no doubt, otherwise
there would have been no need of proclamations
such as those against the arrest of persons whilst
conducting service in church,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, part i, fo. 111b.</p></note> against wrangling over
passages of scripture in common taverns and victualling
houses,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 193.</p></note> or against carrying of baskets of
provisions and leading mules, horses or other beasts
through St. Paul's.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 300. Bishop Braybroke, nearly two centuries
before, had done all he could to put down marketing within the sacred
precincts, and to render "Paul's Walk"&mdash;as the great nave of the
cathedral was called&mdash;less a scene of barter and frivolity.</p></note></p>

<pb n="472" /><anchor id="Pg472" />

<p>The mayor and aldermen endeavoured to set a
good example by constant attendance at the services
and by joining in processions at St. Paul's as in former
days.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 251b.</p></note> The law forbidding the eating of meat in
Lent, except by special licence, was vigorously enforced.<note place="foot"><p>In 1558, a man convicted of breaking this law was ordered to
ride through the public market places of the city, his face towards the
horse's tail, with a piece of beef hanging before and behind him, and a
paper on his head setting forth his offence.&mdash;Repertory 13, fo. 12b.</p></note>
Ale-houses and taverns were closed on
Sundays and holy days, and interludes were forbidden.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 193; Letter Book S, fo. 119b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Opposition to the reestablishment of the old religion.</note>

<p>Nevertheless the attempt to restore the old
worship within the city was often met with scornful
mockery, sometimes attended with violence. A dead
cat, for instance, was one day found hanging in
Cheapside, its head shorn in imitation of a priest's
tonsure, and its body clothed in a mock ecclesiastical
vestment, with cross before and behind, whilst a piece
of white paper to represent a singing-cake was placed
between its forefeet, which had been tied together.
Bonner was very angry at this travesty of religion,
and caused the effigy to be publicly displayed at
Paul's Cross during sermon time. A reward of twenty
marks was offered for the discovery of this atrocious
act, but with what success we do not know.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 285b; Letter Book R, fo. 290b; Repertory 13,
pt. i, fo. 147; Wriothesley, ii, 114.</p></note></p>

<p>On another occasion, when the Holy Sacrament
was being carried in solemn procession through
Smithfield on Corpus Christi-day (24 May), an attempt
was made to knock the holy elements out of the
hands of the priest. The offender was taken to<pb n="473" /><anchor id="Pg473" /><index index="toc" level1="THE MARIAN PERSECUTION." />
Newgate, where he feigned to be mad.<note place="foot"><p>Grey Friars Chron., p. 89.</p></note> Again, on the
following Easter-day a priest was fiercely attacked
by a man with a wood-knife whilst administering the
sacrament in the church of St. Margaret, Westminster.
The culprit was seized, and after trial and conviction
paid the penalty of his crime by being burned at the
stake.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 95.</p></note> A pudding was once offered to a priest whilst
walking in a religious procession,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ibid.</hi></p></note> the offender being
afterwards whipt at the "Post of Reformation," which
had been set up in Cheapside in 1553.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 78n.</p></note> But all this
defiance shown to Mary's attempt to restore the old
worship only led her to exercise more drastic methods
for accomplishing her purpose.</p>

<note place="margin">The Marian persecution, 1555.</note>

<p>By the opening of 1555 her own strong personal
will had overcome the conciliatory policy of her
husband, who was content to restrain his fanaticism
within the limits of expediency, and the Marian
persecution commenced. On the 25th January a
proclamation was issued in the name of the king and
queen, and bearing the signature of William Blackwell,
the town clerk of the city, enjoining the lighting of
bonfires that afternoon in various places in token of
great joy and gladness for the abolition of sundry
great sins, errors and heresies which lately had arisen
within the realm of England, and for the quiet renovation
and restitution of the true Catholic faith of Christ
and his holy religion.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 16, fo. 321b.</p></note> This proclamation was but a
prelude to other fires lighted for a very different
purpose, which the mind even at this day cannot
contemplate without a shudder. The first victim of
the flames for conscience sake was John Rogers, once<pb n="474" /><anchor id="Pg474" />
vicar of St. Sepulchre's church and prebendary of St.
Paul's. He was burnt in Smithfield "for gret herysy"
in February of this year, in which month Hooper,
who had been deprived of his bishopric of Gloucester,
suffered the same fate in his own cathedral city.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 126; Grey Friars Chron., p. 94.</p></note>
In the following May another city vicar, John Cardmaker,
otherwise known as John Taylor of St. Bride's,
who had been a reader at St. Paul's and had publicly
lectured against the real presence, was burnt in Smithfield
with John Warne, an "upholder" of Walbrook.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 126n; Grey Friars Chron., pp. 56, 57, 95.</p></note></p>

<p>Few weeks passed without the fire claiming some
human victim either in London or the provinces.
On the 9th February Thomas Tomkins, a godly and
charitable weaver of Shoreditch, and William Hunter,
a young London apprentice, were with four others
condemned to the stake. The two named met their
fate in Smithfield, one on the 16th March and the
other on the 26th. The rest were removed into
Essex and there consigned to the flames, three of
them in March and one in the following June.<note place="foot"><p>Foxe's "Acts and Monuments," vi, 717, 737, 740, vii, 114, 115.</p></note></p>

<p>In October Bishops Latimer and Ridley were
burnt at Oxford. "Be of good comfort, Master
Ridley, and play the man"&mdash;cried Latimer encouragingly
to his fellow sufferer&mdash;"we shall this day light
such a candle, by God's grace, in England as I trust
shall never be put out." In March of the following
year (1556) Cranmer, after some display of weakness,
suffered the same fate, on the same spot, and with no
less fortitude. And thus for two years more the fires
were kept alive in London and in the country; the<pb n="475" /><anchor id="Pg475" /><index index="toc" level1="FOREIGNERS IN THE CITY." />
Lollard's tower at St. Paul's serving as a prison for
heretics,<note place="foot"><p>"Item the v<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> day of September [1556], was browte thorrow
Cheppesyde teyd in ropes xxiij<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi>i tayd together as herreytkes, and soo
unto the Lowlers tower."&mdash;Grey Friars Chron., p. 98.</p></note> and proving more often than not but a step
to Smithfield.</p>

<note place="margin">Renewed opposition to strangers in the city.</note>

<p>Throughout Mary's reign the strife between the
citizens and merchant strangers was renewed. She
had herself added to the evil by her marriage with
Philip, causing the city to be flooded with Spaniards,
who took up their abode in the halls of the civic
companies.<note place="foot"><p>"At this time [Aug., 1554] there was so many Spanyerdes in
London that a man shoulde have mett in the stretes for one Inglisheman
above iiij Spanyerdes, to the great discomfort of the Inglishe nation.
The halles taken up for Spanyerdes."&mdash;Chron. Q. Jane and Q. Mary, p. 81.</p></note> A rumour got abroad early in September,
1554, that 12,000 Spaniards were coming over "to
fethe the crown,"<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ibid</hi>.</p></note> and this accounts for precepts
being sent to the several aldermen of the city on
the 27th September enjoining them to make a return
of the number of foreigners that had come to reside
in their ward during the past nine or ten days, and
whence they came.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. i, fo. 205b.</p></note> The favour shown by the Crown
to the merchants of the Steelyard was especially
annoying to the freemen of the city.<note place="foot"><p>By an order in council, dated Greenwich, 13 March, 1555, the
merchants of the Steelyard were thenceforth to be allowed to buy cloth
in warehouses adjoining the Steelyard, without hindrance from the
mayor. The mayor was ordered to give up cloth that had been seized
as foreign bought and sold at Blackwell Hall. He was, moreover, not
to demand <hi rend="font-style: italic">quotam salis</hi> of the merchants, who were to be allowed to
import into the city fish, corn and other provisions free of import.&mdash;Repertory
13, pt. ii, fo. 384b; Letter Book S, fo. 76.</p></note> It was to little
purpose that the mayor and aldermen issued orders
from time to time against giving work to foreigners
and prohibiting all such from opening shops within<pb n="476" /><anchor id="Pg476" />
the city.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fos. 399b, 404, 406; Letter Book S, fos. 70, 93b.</p></note> The struggle between citizen and stranger
still went on. In 1557 the corporation made an
effort to induce the king and queen to revoke the
favours shown to the merchants of the Steelyard in
prejudice of the liberties of the city,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 508b.</p></note> and eventually
the privileges were revoked on the ground that the
merchants of the Hanse had not kept faith with the
Crown.<note place="foot"><p>Wheeler's "Treatise of Commerce" (ed. 1601), p. 100.</p></note> In the same year the exclusiveness entertained
by the citizens towards foreigners made
itself felt more particularly against that class of
foreigner which kept open school in the city for
teaching writing. Certain scriveners, freemen of the
city, made a complaint before the Court of Aldermen
against foreigners keeping writing-school within the
city and its liberties.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fos. 507b, 520b, 540.</p></note> The chamberlain's conduct of
shutting in the shop windows of foreigners teaching
children to write was approved by the mayor and
aldermen,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 529.</p></note> whilst freemen were allowed to keep open
school provided they entered into a bond not to engross
deeds.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 526b.</p></note> Occasionally foreigners were successful in
obtaining licences from the civic authorities for teaching
writing, but it was only on condition they kept
their lower windows closed.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 534b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Philip leaves England, 4 Sept., 1555.</note>

<note place="margin">The queen obtains a City loan of £6,000, Aug., 1556.</note>

<note place="margin">War declared against France, 7 June, 1557.</note>

<p>In the meantime the disposition of the queen
towards heretics became more relentless in proportion
as her temper became more soured from ill-health, by
disappointment in not having off-spring, and by the
increasing neglect of her by her husband. Tired of<pb n="477" /><anchor id="Pg477" /><index index="toc" level1="DECLARATION OF WAR WITH FRANCE." />
her importunate love and jealousy, Philip took the
first opportunity of quitting her side and crossed over
to the continent (4 Sept., 1555) on a visit to the
Emperor Charles. The abdication of the latter towards
the close of 1556 made Philip master of the
richest and most extensive dominions in Europe, and
his greatest wish at the time was to engage England
in the war which was kindled between Spain and
France. In this he received the support of Mary,
who had in August (1556) succeeded in obtaining a
loan from the city of £6,000.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 420.</p></note> The seizure of the
castle of Scarborough by Thomas Stafford,<note place="foot"><p>Stafford had issued a proclamation from Scarborough Castle declaiming
against Philip for introducing 12,000 foreigners into the country,
and announcing himself as protector and governor of the realm. He
was captured by the Earl of Westmoreland and executed on Tower
Hill 28 May.&mdash;Journal 17, fo. 34b; Letter Book S, fo. 127b; Holinshed.
iv, 87; Machyn's Diary, p. 137.</p></note> second
son of Lord Stafford, in which he was reported to
have received encouragement from the King of France,
was made a <hi rend="font-style: italic">casus belli</hi>, and Henry was proclaimed an
open enemy (7 June, 1557).<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 37b; Letter Book S, fo. 131.</p></note> French subjects were
allowed forty days to quit the country, and letters of
marque were issued by proclamation on the 9th June.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fos. 37b, 38; Letter Book S, fo. 131b.</p></note>
On the 5th July Philip once more left England for
Flanders,<note place="foot"><p>Machyn, p. 142.</p></note> having succeeded in the object for which
he had come, viz., the declaration of war against
France.</p>

<note place="margin">A City contingent joins the expedition to France.</note>

<p>The citizens of London at once began to take
stock of their munitions of war. On the 22nd
June the Chamberlain was instructed to prepare with
all convenient speed four dozen good <hi rend="font-style: italic">splentes</hi> and<pb n="478" /><anchor id="Pg478" />
as many good <hi rend="font-style: italic">sallettes</hi> or <hi rend="font-style: italic">sculles</hi> for the city's
use, and to cause a bowyer to "peruse" the city's
bows and to put them in such good order that
they might be serviceable when required.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 517.</p></note> In
the following month a large force crossed over
to France under the leadership of Lords Pembroke,
Montagu and Clinton. To this force the City of
London contributed a contingent of 500 men, the best
(according to Machyn<note place="foot"><p>"London fond v.c. men all in bluw cassokes, sum by shyppes
and sum to Dover by land, the goodlyst men that ever whent, and best
be-sene in change (of) apprelle."&mdash;Diary, p. 143.</p></note>) that had ever been sent.
They mustered at the Leadenhall on the 16th July in
the presence of Sir Thomas Offley,<note place="foot"><p>Merchant Taylor, son of William Offley, of Chester; alderman of
Portsoken and Aldgate Wards. Was one of the signatories to the
document nominating Lady Jane Grey successor to Edward VI, and
was within a few weeks (1 Aug.) elected sheriff. Knighted with alderman
William Chester, 7 Feb., 1557.  His mansion-house was in Lime
Street, near the Church of St. Andrew Undershaft. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ob.</hi> 29 Aug, 1582.&mdash;Machyn,
pp. 125, 353; Index to Remembrancia, p. 37, note.  Fuller,
who erroneously places his death in 1580, describes him as the "Zaccheus
of London" not "on account of his low stature, but his great charity
in bestowing half of his estate on the poor."&mdash;Fuller's "Worthies,"
p. 191.</p></note> the mayor, the
sheriffs and Sir Richard Lee, and were conveyed
thence by water to Gravesend and Rochester under
the charge of ten officers, whose names are duly
recorded.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fos. 521b, 522; Letter Book S, fo. 134.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City called upon to furnish another contingent of 1,000 men, 31 July.</note>

<p>On the last day of July the queen informed the
civic authorities by letter of the departure of her
"deerest lord and husband" to pursue the enemy in
France, and desired them to get in readiness 1,000
men, a portion of whom were to be horsemen, well
horsed and armed, and the rest to be archers, pikes
and billmen. The force was to be ready by the<pb n="479" /><anchor id="Pg479" /><index index="toc" level1="SOLDIERS FURNISHED BY THE CITY." />
16th August at the latest, after which date it was to
be prepared to set out at a day's notice. The letter
contained a schedule of names of individuals to whom
the queen had made special application, and these
were not to be called upon by the municipal officers
to make any contribution, neither were the tenants
of those noblemen and gentlemen already on active
service in France.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 54b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The citizens make demur, but in vain.</note>

<p>The Court of Aldermen was taken aback at such
a demand coming so soon after the setting out of the
previous force, and on the 4th August it instructed the
Recorder and one of the sheriffs to repair to the
queen's council "for the good and suer understandyng
of her majesty's pleasure" in the matter. The deputation
was further instructed to remind the lords of the
council not only of the ancient liberties and franchises
of the city on the point, but also of the city's lack of
power to furnish a number of men exceeding any it
had ever been called upon to furnish before.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 530.</p></note> It was
all to no purpose; the men had to be provided; and
the matter having been fully explained to the wardens
of the several livery companies, they succeeded in
raising the force required.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fos. 530, 532, 522b, 535; Journal 17, fo. 54.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The French king defeated at St. Quentin, 27 Aug., 1557.</note>

<p>The defeat of the French king at St. Quentin
was celebrated in the city by a solemn procession
to St. Paul's, in which figured the mayor and aldermen
in their scarlet gowns.<note place="foot"><p>Machyn, p. 147.</p></note> The joy of the citizens
was shortlived. Philip's caution did not allow him
to avail himself of the opportunity thus offered
him of marching on the French capital, and before<pb n="480" /><anchor id="Pg480" />
the end of the year matters had taken a different
turn.</p>

<note place="margin">The loss of Calais, 7 Jan., 1558.</note>

<note place="margin">A city force despatched, 24 Jan., 1558.</note>

<p>In December a Spaniard named Ferdinando
Lygons was commissioned to raise 300 mounted
archers in the city of London and county of Middlesex.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 571.</p></note>
At the opening of the new year (2 Jan., 1558)
the queen wrote to the corporation desiring to be at
once furnished with 500 men out of the 1,000 men
the city had been ordered to keep in readiness since
July. As the matter was urgent they were not to
wait to supply the men with coats.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 55. See Appendix. They were ordered in the
first instance to be forwarded to Dover by the 19th Jan. at the latest, but
on the 6th Jan. the Privy Council sent a letter to the mayor to the effect
that "albeit he was willed to send the v<hi rend="vertical-align: super">c</hi> men levied in London to
Dover, forasmuch as it is sithence considered here that they may with
best speede be brought to the place of service by seas, he is willen to
sende them with all speede by hoyes to Queenburgh, where order is
given for the receavinge and placing of them in the shippes, to be
transported with all speede possible."&mdash;Harl. MS. 643, fo. 198; Notes
to Machyn's Diary, p. 362.</p></note> The force was
required for the defence of Calais, which was now in
a critical position. On the 9th January another
letter was sent by Mary marked, <hi rend="font-style: italic">Hast, Hast Post,
Hast, For lief, For lief, For lief, For lief!</hi> demanding
the full contingent of 1,000 men.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 56.</p></note> Calais had fallen
two days before,<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 140.</p></note> and Mary was determined not to
rest until the town had been recovered. Diligent
search was at once instituted throughout the city
for all persons, strangers as well as freemen, capable
of wearing harness;<note place="foot"><p>Order of the Court of Aldermen, 10 Jan.&mdash;Repertory 13, pt. ii,
fo. 582.</p></note> and the livery companies and
fellowships were called upon to provide double the
number of men they had furnished in July last.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 13, pt. ii, fo. 582b; Precept to the Companies.&mdash;Journal
17, fo. 56b.</p></note><pb n="481" /><anchor id="Pg481" /><index index="toc" level1="THE LOSS OF CALAIS." />
On the 13th the queen wrote to say that a violent
storm, which had occurred on the night of the 10th
January, had so crippled the fleet that her forces
could not be conveyed across the channel; the
civic authorities were therefore to withhold sending
their force to the sea-coast until further orders, but
to keep the same in readiness to start at an hour's
notice.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 57. So furious was this storm, lasting four or five
days, that "some said that the same came to passe through necromancie,
and that the diuell was raised vp and become French, the truth
whereof is known (saith Master Grafton) to God."&mdash;Holinshed, iv, 93.</p></note> On the 19th January the citizens were
informed by letter that Philip's forces were on their
way to Flanders, under the Duke of Savoy, and that
the channel was being kept open by a fleet under
Don Luis Carvaial. One half of the force of 1,000
men, furnished with armour and weapons and coats of
white welted with green and red crosses, was to be
despatched to Dover by the end of the month, thence
to sail for Dunkirk for service under the Earl of
Rutland. The City was to take especial care that
the contingent should be chosen from the handsomest
and best picked men, and superior to those
last sent.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 7.</p></note> The force mustered at the Leadenhall, the
24th January, for inspection by the mayor, and at
five o'clock in the evening were delivered over to
the captains for shipment.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 14, fo. 1b; Journal 17, fo. 58; Machyn, 164.</p></note> Three days later the
lords of the council instructed the mayor to make
a return of the number of foreigners residing still
within the city, and to make proclamation on the
next market day that it should be lawful thenceforth
for anyone to seize the persons of Frenchmen who
had not avoided the city pursuant to a previous order,<pb n="482" /><anchor id="Pg482" />
and to confiscate their goods and chattels to his own
proper use.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fos. 59, 59b; Letter Book S, fos. 154b, 155.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A city loan of £20,000, March, 1558.</note>

<p>Mary succeeded in March in raising a loan in the
city of £20,000 (she had asked for 100,000 marks or
£75,000<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1547-1580), p. 100; Wriothesley, ii,
140, 141.</p></note>) on the security of the crown lands. The
loan bore interest at the rate of twelve per cent., and
a special dispensation was granted to avoid the
penalties of the Usury Act.<note place="foot"><p>Stat. 5 and 6, Edward VI, c. 20, which repealed Stat. <hi rend="font-style: italic">37</hi>, Henry
VIII, c. 9 (allowing interest to be taken on loans at the rate of ten per
cent.) and forbade all usury. This Statute was afterwards repealed
(Stat. 13, Eliz., c. 8) and the Statute of Henry VIII re-enacted. The
dispensation granted by Mary was confirmed in 1560 by Elizabeth.&mdash;Repertory
14, fo. 404b.</p></note> The money was raised
by assessment on the livery companies. On the
16th March the Court of Aldermen summoned
the wardens of the twelve principal companies
to attend at the Guildhall at eight o'clock the
next morning, in order that they might learn how
much the lords of the council had "<hi rend="font-weight: bold">tottyd</hi>" against
each of them towards the loan. The smaller companies
were to attend in the afternoon of the same
day in order to be informed of the sums the Court of
Aldermen deemed fit that each should contribute to
assist their wealthier brethren. The total amount subscribed
by the greater companies was £16,983 <hi rend="font-style: italic">6s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi>,
of which the Mercers contributed £3,275. The lesser
companies subscribed £1,310, in sums varying from
£30 to £500.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 14, fo. 15b; Journal 17, fo. 63. A large portion of
this loan was repaid by Elizabeth soon after her accession.&mdash;Repertory 14,
fos. 236b, 289.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Death of Mary, 17 Nov., 1558.</note>

<p>It is probable that Mary wanted this loan to
enable her to prosecute the war. The country was<pb n="483" /><anchor id="Pg483" /><index index="toc" level1="DEATH OF MARY." />
not disposed, however, to assist her in this direction.
The people were afraid of rendering Philip too powerful.
Disappointed both in her public and domestic
life, she fell a victim to dropsy and died on the
17th November&mdash;"wondering why all that she had
done, as she believed on God's behalf, had been
followed by failure on every side&mdash;by the desertion
of her husband, and the hatred of her subjects."
The loss of Calais so much affected her that she
declared that the name of the town would be found
impressed upon her heart after death. On the
occasion of her funeral the City put in its customary
claim for black livery cloth, but more than one
application had to be made before the cloth was
forthcoming.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 14, fos. 94b, 96b.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="484" /><anchor id="Pg484" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XVII.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<head></head>
<note place="margin">The ascension of Elizabeth, 17 Nov., 1558.</note>

<p>The accession of Elizabeth, after the gloomy
reign of her sister, was welcomed by none more joyfully
than by the citizens of London, who continued
to commemorate the day with bonfires and general
rejoicing long after the queen had been laid in her
grave.<note place="foot"><p>The commemoration was eventually put down by the Stuarts as
giving rise to tumults and disorders.&mdash;Journal 49, fo. 270b; Luttrell's
Diary, 17 Nov., 1682.</p></note> When news was brought of her sister's death
Elizabeth was at Hatfield. Within a week she
removed to London and took up her abode at the
Charterhouse. The sheriffs went out to meet her
as far as the boundary of the county of Middlesex,
the limit of their jurisdiction, dressed in coats of velvet,
with their chains about their necks and white rods in
their hands. Having first kissed their rods, they
handed them to the queen, who immediately returned
them, and the sheriffs thereupon joined the gentlemen
of the cavalcade and rode before her majesty
until they met Sir Thomas Leigh,<note place="foot"><p>Son of Roger Leigh, of Wellington, co. Salop, an apprentice of
Sir Rowland Hill, whose niece, Alice Barker, he married. Buried in
the Mercers' Chapel. By his second son, William, he was ancestor of
the Lords Leigh, of Stoneleigh, and by his third son William, grandfather
of Francis Leigh, Earl of Chichester.&mdash;Notes to Machyn's
Diary, p. 407.</p></note> the mayor, and
his brethren the aldermen. The sheriffs then fell
back and took their places among the aldermen.<note place="foot"><p>"The order of the sheryfes at the receyvyng of the quenes
highenes in to Myddlesex."&mdash;Letter Book S, fo. 183; Repertory 14,
fo. 90b.</p></note><pb n="485" /><anchor id="Pg485" /><index index="toc" level1="CORONATION OF QUEEN ELIZABETH." />
From the Charterhouse she removed after a stay
of a few days to the Tower, amid the blare of
trumpets, the singing of children and the firing of
ordnance.</p>

<note place="margin">The queen's coronation, 15 Jan., 1559.</note>

<p>The Court of Common Council (21 Nov.) agreed
to levy two fifteenths on the inhabitants of the city
for the customary present to be given the new queen
on her passing through the city to her coronation,
which was to take place on the 15th January following,
as well as for defraying the costs of pageants on
the occasion.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book S, fo. 182b; Journal 7, fo. 101b.</p></note> Committees were appointed to see
that the several conduits, the Standard and Cross in
Cheap, and other parts of the city were seemly
trimmed and decked with pageants, fine paintings
and rich cloth of Arras, silver and gold, as at the
coronation of Queen Mary, and better still if it conveniently
could be done.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 14, fos. 97, 98.</p></note> Among those appointed to
devise pageants for the occasion and to act as masters
of the ceremony was Richard Grafton, the printer.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 99.</p></note>
Eight commoners were appointed by the Court of
Aldermen (17 Dec.) to attend upon the chief butler of
England at the cupboard at the coronation banquet.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 102b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A strike among the painters.</note>

<p>A curious instance of a strike among painters is
recorded at this time. The painters of the city, we
are told, utterly refused to fresh paint and trim the
great conduit in Cheap for the coronation for the sum
of twenty marks. This being the case, the surveyors
of the city were instructed to cause the same to be
covered with cloth of Arras having escutcheons of the
queen's Arms finely made and set therein, and the
wardens of the Painters' Company were called upon<pb n="486" /><anchor id="Pg486" />
to render assistance with advice and men for reasonable
remuneration.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 14, fo. 103b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Elizabeth's policy of moderation, 1558.</note>

<p>The main object which Elizabeth kept before her
eyes, from first to last, was the preservation of peace&mdash;peace
within the Church and without. Her natural
inclination was towards the more ornate ritual of the
Roman Church, but the necessity she was under of
gaining the support of the Protestants, whom even the
fires of Smithfield had failed to suppress, inspired
restraint. All her actions were marked with caution
and deliberation. From the day of her accession
religious persecution in its worst form ceased. Non-conformity
was no longer punished by death. Preachers
who took advantage of the lull which followed the
Marian persecution and resumed disputatious sermons,
as they did more especially in the city, were silenced
by royal proclamation,<note place="foot"><p>Dated 27 Dec., 1558.&mdash;Journal 17, fo. 106b.</p></note> which ordered them to confine
themselves to reading the gospel and epistle for the
day, and the Ten Commandments, in the vulgar tongue,
without adding any comment. They were further
ordered to make use of no public prayer, rite or
ceremony other than that already accepted until parliament
should ordain otherwise.</p>

<note place="margin">The Act of Uniformity and Supremacy, 1558.</note>

<p>Parliament met in January, 1559, and at once
acknowledged the queen's legitimacy and her title to
the crown, an acknowledgment which she had failed
to obtain from the Pope. An Act of Uniformity was
passed forbidding the use of any form of public prayer
other than that set out in the last Prayer Book of
Edward VI, amended in those particulars which
savoured of ultra-Protestantism. The same parliament<pb n="487" /><anchor id="Pg487" /><index index="toc" level1="RESTORATION OF THE PRAYER BOOK." />
also passed an Act of Supremacy, which dropt the
title of supreme head of the Church with reference
to the queen, but still upheld the ancient jurisdiction
of the Crown over all ecclesiastics. Having accomplished
this much, parliament was dissolved (8 May).</p>

<note place="margin">The restoration of the Prayer Book and abolition of the Mass, 1559.</note>

<p>On the following Whitsunday (14 May) Divine
Service was conducted in the city in English according
to the Book of Common Prayer.<note place="foot"><p>Wriothesley, ii, 145.</p></note> Commissioners
were appointed in July "to ride about the realm for
the establishing of true religion," four being nominated
for the city, whose duty it was to call before them
divers persons of every parish and make them swear
to observe "certain injunctions newly set out in
print."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> <hi rend="font-style: italic">ibid</hi>.</p></note> The election of a new mayor at Michaelmas
was followed by the celebration of a "communion"
in the Guildhall Chapel."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 4, fo. 213b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Ultra-Protestant reformers in the city, 1559.</note>

<p>The success of Elizabeth's policy was unfortunately
marred by the excess of zeal displayed by
the reformers. More especially was this the case in
the city of London. Had the inhabitants bent their
energy towards putting down the disgraceful trafficking
that went on within the very walls of their
cathedral church, shutting up gambling houses, and
stopping interludes and plays which made a jest of
religion, instead of leaving such abuses to be corrected
by royal proclamation,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fos. 120b, 168; Repertory 14, fo. 152; Letter Book T,
fo. 82b.</p></note> their conduct would have
met with universal approbation. Instead of this they
again set to work pulling down roods, smashing up
ancient tombs and committing to the flames vestments<pb n="488" /><anchor id="Pg488" />
and service books&mdash;the work of years of artistic
labour<note place="foot"><p>"In some places the coapes, vestments, and aulter clothes, bookes,
banners, sepulchers and other ornaments of the churches were burned,
which cost above £2,000 renuinge agayne in Queen Maries time"
(Wriothesley, ii, 146; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Machyn, p. 298). Among the churchwarden
accounts of the parish of St. Mary-at-Hill for the year 1558-1559 there
is a payment of one shilling for "bringing down ymages to Romeland
(near Billingsgate) to be burnt."</p></note>&mdash;until the wanton destruction was restricted,
if not altogether stopped, by the queen's orders.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, dated 19 Sept., 1559.&mdash;Journal 17, fo. 267; Letter
Book T, fo. 5b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The claims of Mary Stuart, 1559-1560.</note>

<p>In the meantime the state of affairs with France
and Scotland demanded Elizabeth's attention. The
marriage of Mary Stuart with the Dauphin of France
had taken place in April, 1558, and the sudden death
of Henry II of France by an accident at a tournament
had soon afterwards raised her and her husband to
the throne. Mary now assumed the arms and style of
Queen of England, and the life-long quarrel between
her and Elizabeth was about to commence. By the
end of the year (1559) Mary had collected a sufficient
force at her back to render her mistress of Scotland.
In the following January a French fleet was ready
to set sail. Nevertheless Elizabeth refused to take
any active measures to meet the enemy and to prevent
them effecting a landing. On the 6th she caused
proclamation to be made for French subjects to be
allowed perfect freedom as in time of peace, but
English vessels were to be held in readiness "untill yt
maye appeare to what ende the greate preparaciouns
of Fraunce do entende."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fo. 184b.</p></note> Long after the appearance
of a French fleet off the coast of Scotland, and
when it had been driven to take refuge in Leith
harbour, Elizabeth still declared her intention of<pb n="489" /><anchor id="Pg489" /><index index="toc" level1="THE WAR WITH FRANCE." />
keeping, if possible, on friendly terms with France if
only the "insolent titles and claims" of Francis and
Mary might cease and Scotland left in peace.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, dated 24 March, 1560.&mdash;Journal 17, fo. 223b.</p></note> With
the aid of soldiers and seamen provided by the City<note place="foot"><p>In April the city was called upon to furnish 900 soldiers, in May
250 seamen, and in June 200 soldiers.&mdash;Repertory 14, fos. 323, 336,
339b, 340, 340b, 344b; Journal 17, fos. 238b, 244. It is noteworthy
that the number of able men in the city at this time serviceable for war,
although untrained, was estimated to amount to no more than 5,000.&mdash;Journal
17, fo. 244b.</p></note>
the French were forced to surrender, and, by a treaty
signed at Edinburgh, agreed to leave Scotland and to
acknowledge Elizabeth's right to the English crown.</p>

<note place="margin">The French war, 1562-1564.</note>

<p>In 1561 Mary, who had declined to recognise the
treaty of Edinburgh from the first, returned to Scotland,
in spite of Elizabeth's prohibition, and soon succeeded
in drawing over many Protestants to her side. In the
following year an opportunity offered itself to Elizabeth
for striking a blow at her rival&mdash;not in Scotland,
but in France. A civil war had broken out between
the French Protestants&mdash;or Huguenots, as they were
called&mdash;and their Catholic fellow-subjects, and Elizabeth
promised (Sept., 1562) to assist the leaders of
the Huguenots on condition that Havre&mdash;or Newhaven,
as the place was then known&mdash;was surrendered
to her as security for the fulfilment of a promise to
surrender Calais. The queen (23 July, 1562) applied
by letter to the City of London for a force of 600 men
to be held in readiness to march at a moment's notice.
She had determined, the letter said, to put the sea
coast into a "fencible arraye of warre."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fos. 57-60b. The livery companies furnished the men
according to allotment. The barber-surgeons claimed exemption by
statute (32 Henry VIII, c. 42), but subsequently consented to waive
their claim. The city also objected to supplying the soldiers with
cloaks.&mdash;Repertory 15, fos. 110b, 113.</p></note> The men<pb n="490" /><anchor id="Pg490" />
were ordered to muster at the Leadenhall on the
18th September.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fo. 66; Machyn, pp. 292, 293.</p></note> The aim and object of the expedition
was set out in a "boke" or proclamation.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fo. 71.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Soldiers for the defence of Havre. 1563.</note>

<p>In 1563 a peace was patched up, and the Catholics
and Huguenots united in demanding from Elizabeth
the restoration of Havre. The queen refused to
surrender the town, and again called upon the City of
London to furnish her with 1,000 men for the purpose
of enabling her to secure Havre, and to compel the
French to surrender Calais as promised.<note place="foot"><p>The queen to the mayor and corporation of London, 30 June, 1563.&mdash;Journal
18, fo. 124.</p></note> The Court
of Aldermen hesitated to raise so large a force, and
sent a deputation of three of their court to wait upon
the lords of the Privy Council the same afternoon,
with a view to having the number reduced to 500 on
the ground that the City had supplied so many soldiers
during the past year.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fo. 258.</p></note> The deputation having reported
to the court the next day (3 July) that the Privy
Council would make no abatement in the number of
soldiers to be furnished, it was agreed to renew the
application.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 259.</p></note> Again the City's request was refused,
and the full number of 1,000 men was apportioned
among the livery companies.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 263.</p></note> The citizens, jealous
as they always were of the stranger within their gates,
availed themselves of a too literal interpretation of
a royal proclamation and seized all the Frenchmen
they could find in the city with all their belongings.
They even went so far as to attack the house of the
French ambassador, and would probably have gone<pb n="491" /><anchor id="Pg491" /><index index="toc" level1="THE LOSS OF HAVRE OR NEWHAVEN." />
yet further lengths had they not been stopt by
peremptory orders from the queen.<note place="foot"><p>The queen to the mayor, 2 Aug., 1563.&mdash;Journal 18, fo. 140.
Precept of the mayor.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 136; Repertory 15, fo. 279b; Machyn's
Diary, p. 312.</p></note></p>

<p>On the 8th July the City was informed by letter
from the queen that the French had already commenced
the siege of Havre, and was asked to have
400 out of the 1,000 men ready to set sail with Lord
Clinton by the 16th.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fo. 128.</p></note> This letter was immediately
followed by another from Lord Clinton summoning
every inhabitant of the city "usinge the exercise of
eny kynde of water crafte" before the lord high
admiral or his deputy at Deptford on a certain day.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 119b.</p></note>
The Common Hunt, the city's water-bailiffs, two
sergeants-at-mace and two sheriff's officers were
appointed by the Court of Aldermen to "conduct"
the city's contingent to the fleet lying in the Thames.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fo. 265b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The loss of Havre, July, 1563.</note>

<p>Before the end of July Havre was lost.<note place="foot"><p>Machyn, 312.</p></note> The
garrison had been attacked by a plague, which for
more than a twelvemonth had been rampant in
London,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fos. 139, 139b, 142, 151b, 152b, 154, 156b, 184, 189b.
With the sickness was associated, as was so often the case, a scarcity of
food.&mdash;Repertory 15, fos. 127, 133b, 138, 168, 178, 179b, etc. The
rate of mortality increased to such an extent that a committee was
appointed for the purpose of procuring more burial accommodation.&mdash;Repertory
15, fos. 311b, 313b, 333.</p></note> and the Earl of Warwick, the commander
of the town, found himself compelled to accept such
terms as he could obtain. The garrison was allowed
to leave with all munitions of war. Whilst proclaiming
to her subjects the surrender of the town&mdash;not
through any cowardice on the part of the garrison,
but owing to a "plage of infectuous mortall sickness"<pb n="492" /><anchor id="Pg492" />
inflicted by the Almighty&mdash;Elizabeth pleaded for
tender care and charity to be shown to the soldiers
on their return, due precaution being taken by the
principal officers of every city, town and parish against
the spread of infection.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation dated 1 Aug., 1563.&mdash;Journal 18, fo. 141.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Peace between England and France signed, 13 April, 1564.</note>

<p>The approaching end of the war with France is
foreshadowed by an order of the Court of Aldermen
(25 Nov., 1563) touching the re-delivery to the various
civic companies of the "harness" which they severally
provided for the war, and which had been forwarded
from Portsmouth and was lying in the Guildhall
Chapel.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fo. 284b.</p></note> Peace was signed on the 13th April, 1564,
and on the 31st July a proclamation was issued for
disbanding the navy.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fo. 249.</p></note> Throughout the war Elizabeth
had been careful to keep on good terms with Spain,
and English vessels found molesting Spanish ships
under pretext of searching for French goods were
ordered to be arrested.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 190b.</p></note> An interruption of commerce
with Flanders had been threatened, owing to
the Duchess of Parma having forbidden the importation
of English woollen cloth into the Low Countries
for fear of infection from the plague, but Elizabeth
retaliated by closing English ports to all Flemish
vessels, and matters were accommodated.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18, fos. 214, 215, 227, 291b, 354b; Holinshed, iv, 224.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The restoration of St. Paul's Cathedral, 1561-1565.</note>

<p>The period of peace and tranquillity which
ensued enabled the citizens to bestow more attention
on their own affairs. Their cathedral stood in urgent
need of repairs. Its steeple had been struck by
lightning in 1561, and 3,000 marks had already been<pb n="493" /><anchor id="Pg493" /><index index="toc" level1="THE RESTORATION OF ST. PAUL'S." />
expended on its restoration.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 17, fos. 320, 321, 331b; Letter Book T, fos. 42, 42b;
Repertory 14, fo. 491b. The fire caused by the lightning threatened
the neighbouring shops, and their contents were therefore removed to
Christchurch, Newgate and elsewhere for safety.&mdash;Journal 17, fo. 319b;
Letter Book T, fo. 42.</p></note> An application to the
City from the lord treasurer in 1565 for a sum of
£300 towards roofing one of the aisles of the
cathedral came as a surprise to the Court of Aldermen,
who caused enquiries to be made as to the
receipt and delivery of contributions already made,
and returned for answer that the City of London
had long ago delivered "all such mony as the
sayd cyty dyd at eny tyme grant or agree to geve
or paye towards the sayd work." His lordship
was desired "no further to charge or burden the sayd
cytye w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> the payment of any more mony towards
the sayd work."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fos. 474, 478.</p></note> Nevertheless the City was called
upon for a further contribution two years later
(June, 1567), when negotiations were entered into
between the City, the Bishop of London and the
Dean and Chapter of Saint Paul's, which ended in the
Corporation agreeing to find forty foders of lead for
roofing the south aisle of the cathedral, and lending
a sum of £150 to the bishop and the dean and
chapter, on condition the latter granted a further lease
to the City of the manor of Finsbury for a term of
200 years beyond the term yet unexpired.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fos. 227, 241b, 274; Letter Book V, fo. 108b.</p></note> Whilst
repairs were being carried out in the cathedral itself,
something was also being done outside the building
to render the accommodation for hearing the sermons
preached at Paul's Cross more convenient for the
mayor and aldermen and municipal officers. A gutter<pb n="494" /><anchor id="Pg494" />
which conducted rainwater upon the heads of the
lord mayor's suite at sermon time was removed; the
bench on which the civic officials sat was enlarged
for their better convenience, and places erected for
the accommodation of aldermen's wives.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fos. 303b, 448. Among the Chamber Accounts of
this period we find an item of a sum exceeding £4 paid for "Cusshens
to be occupied at Powles by my L. Maio<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> and thaldermen, vz:&mdash;for
cloth for the uttorside lyning of leather feathers and for making of
theym as by a bill appearth."&mdash;Chamber Accounts, Town Clerk's Office,
vol. i, fo. 50b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Sir Thomas Gresham and the City Burse. 1565-1566.</note>

<p>The rapid increase of commerce under the
fostering care of Elizabeth rendered the erection of
a Burse or Exchange for the accommodation of
merchants "to treate of their feate of merchandyzes"
a pressing necessity. The matter had been mooted
thirty years before, but little had been done beyond
ascertaining the opinion of merchants as to the most
convenient site.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 13, fos. 417, 420, 435, 442b, 443.</p></note> The project, however, took root in
the mind of Sir Richard Gresham, an alderman of the
city, whose business had occasionally carried him to
Antwerp, where he became familiar with the Burse
that had been recently set up there, and in 1537 (the
year that he was elected mayor) he forwarded to
Thomas Cromwell, then lord privy seal, a design for
a similar Burse to be erected in London. Finding
little or no attention paid to his communication he
again (25 July, 1538) wrote to Cromwell suggesting
the erection of a Burse in Lombard Street&mdash;the site
favoured by city merchants&mdash;at a cost of £2,000. If
the lord privy seal would but bring pressure to bear
upon Sir George Monoux, a brother alderman but a
man of "noe gentyll nature," to part with certain
property at cost price, he (Gresham) would undertake<pb n="495" /><anchor id="Pg495" /><index index="toc" level1="THE INCEPTION OF THE ROYAL EXCHANGE." />
to raise £1,000 towards the building before he went
out of office, and he would himself carry Cromwell's
letter to Monoux and "handle him" as best he
could.<note place="foot"><p>Cotton MS., Otho E, x. fo. 45; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Burgon's "Life of Gresham,"
i, 31-33.</p></note> This application had the desired effect. On
the 13th August Henry VIII addressed a letter to
Monoux desiring him to dispose of certain tenements
about Lombard Street which were required for the
commonweal of merchants of the city, and to come
to terms with Gresham as to the amount to be paid
for them. Both parties having referred the matter
to Sir Richard Rich, Chancellor of the Court of
Augmentations of the Crown, as arbitrator, the City
agreed to pay a yearly sum of twenty marks for the
houses that were required. Monoux refusing to accept
this sum, another letter was despatched to him from
the king urging him not to stand in the way of a
project so useful to merchants and tending so much
to the "beautifitye" of the city. To this second
appeal Monoux gave way, and received the cordial
thanks of Henry by letter dated the 25th November.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 14, fos. 124, 124b.</p></note>
Nothing more was done in the matter until it was
taken up many years later by Sir Thomas Gresham,
son of Sir Richard.<note place="foot"><p>By Sir Richard's first wife Audrey, daughter of William Lynne, of
Southwick, co. Northampton. Sir Thomas is supposed to have been
born in London in 1519. Having been bound apprentice to his uncle,
Sir John Gresham, he was admitted to the freedom of the Mercers'
Company in 1543. Married Anne, daughter of William Ferneley, of
West Creting, co. Suffolk, widow of William Read, mercer.</p></note> Acting, as he did for a long
succession of years, as Queen Elizabeth's agent in
Flanders, Sir Thomas spent much of his time in
Antwerp.<note place="foot"><p>The queen's business kept him so much abroad that her majesty
wrote to the Common Council (7 March, 1563) desiring that he might
be discharged from all municipal duties.&mdash;Journal 18, fo. 137.</p></note> When he was not there himself he<pb n="496" /><anchor id="Pg496" />
employed a factor in the person of Richard Clough to
conduct his affairs. In 1561 this Richard Clough, in
a letter addressed to his principal from Antwerp
(31 Dec.),<note place="foot"><p>Printed in Burgon's "Life of Gresham," i, 409.</p></note> expressed much astonishment at the City
of London being so far behind continental towns:&mdash;"Consideryng
what a sittey London ys, and that in
so many yeres they have nott founde the menes to
make a bourse! but must walke in the raine, when
ytt raineth, more lyker pedlers then marchants; and
in thys countrie, and all other, there is no kynde
of pepell that have occasion to meete, butt they
have a plase meete for that pourpose." Indeed,
Clough got quite excited over the thought that
London, of all cities in the world, possessed no decent
accommodation for merchants transacting their everyday
business, and declared his readiness to build "so
fere a bourse in London as the grett bourse is in
Andwarpe" and that "withhoutt molestyng of any
man more than he shulld be well dysposyd to geve."</p>

<p>It was not long before Gresham made up his
mind that London should have a Burse, and in May,
1563, the Court of Aldermen deputed Lionel Duckett,
who was also a mercer, to sound Gresham as to "his
benevolence towards the makyng of a burse."<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fo. 237b.</p></note> But
however desirous Gresham might be to prosecute the
work, he was prevented from doing so by stress
of business. Commercial difficulties arose between
England and the Low Countries owing to the proclamation
of the Duchess of Parma. Up to the year
1564 Gresham was forced to make Antwerp his place
of abode, and could only occasionally visit London;<pb n="497" /><anchor id="Pg497" /><index index="toc" level1="SIR THOMAS GRESHAM." />
since that time, however, his business allowed him
to look upon London as his permanent residence, and
he only crossed over to Antwerp when special circumstances
rendered it necessary. An additional
reason for the delay in carrying out Gresham's project
may perhaps be found in the fact that, during his
absence on the queen's business in 1563, Elizabeth
had, with her usual parsimony, cut down Gresham's
allowance of twenty shillings a day for "his diets."
Gresham complained bitterly of this abridgment of his
income in a letter to Secretary Cecil, and also in another
letter couched in more guarded terms to the queen
herself.<note place="foot"><p>Burgon, ii, 30-40.</p></note> In both letters he set out the sum total of
the money (£830,000) which he had negotiated for
the queen, and referred to his having broken a leg in
her majesty's service and to his declining years. Whatever
may have been the cause of the delay, it was
not until the 4th January, 1565, that a definite offer
was made by Gresham to erect a "comely burse" at
his own cost and charge, provided the City would
furnish a suitable site. This offer was accepted.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fos. 406b, 407.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Difficulties of obtaining a site.</note>

<p>Difficulties at once presented themselves in finding
a site. It was originally proposed to obtain from
the Merchant Taylors' Company a plot of land
between Lombard Street and Cornhill, but the company
refused to part with the property and a new site
had to be chosen.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fos. 410b, 412.</p></note> No sooner was this done, and a
place selected to the north of Cornhill, than a difficulty
arose between the City and the Dean and Chapter of
Canterbury as to the terms of purchase.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 417b, 431.</p></note> This having
been successfully overcome and the site purchased,<pb n="498" /><anchor id="Pg498" />
the next step was to invite subscriptions, not only
from members of the livery companies, but from
merchant adventurers beyond the sea.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fos. 31b, 32b, 43b; Letter Book V, fos. 5, 7b, 8,
17, 21b.</p></note> Such a liberal
response was made to this invitation<note place="foot"><p>The amount of subscriptions and charges is set out in a "booke"
and entered on the City's Journal (No. 19, fos. 12-20; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Letter Book
V, fos. 70b-79); see also Repertory 16, fo. 126.</p></note> that on the
7th June, 1566, Sir Thomas Gresham was able to lay
the first stone of the new building, a deed of trust
between the City and Gresham having previously
(14 May) been executed.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 18. fo. 398.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Strong foreign element in connection with the building of the first Burse.</note>

<p>It is curious to note the strong foreign element
in connection with the building of Gresham's Burse.
The architect as well as the design of the building came
from abroad. The clerk of the works (Henryk)<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fo. 316.</p></note>
and most of the workmen were foreigners, Gresham
having obtained special permission from the Court of
Aldermen for their employment.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fo. 406b.</p></note> Most of the
material for structural as well as ornamental purposes
(saving 100,000 bricks provided by the City)<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fo. 268b.</p></note> came
from abroad, and to this day the Royal Exchange is
paved with small blocks of Turkish hone-stones believed
to have been imported in Gresham's day, and
to have been relaid after the several fires of 1666
and 1838. It was the employment of these strangers
which probably gave rise to an order of the Court of
Aldermen (19 June, 1567) that an officer should be
appointed to attend at the Burse daily "for a competent
season," to see that no "misorder" be done
to any of the artificers or other workmen there<pb n="499" /><anchor id="Pg499" /><index index="toc" level1="THE ROYAL EXCHANGE COMPLETED." />
employed, and to commit to ward any that he should
find so-doing.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fo. 229.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Burse opened by Q. Elizabeth, 23 Jan., 1571.</note>

<p>By the 22nd December, 1568, the Burse was so
far complete as to allow of merchants holding their
meetings within its walls, but it was not until the
23rd January, 1571, that the queen herself visited it
in state and caused it thenceforth to be called the
Royal Exchange. Her statue which graced the
building bore testimony to the care and interest she
always displayed in fostering commercial enterprise.</p>

<note place="margin">Wanton damage done to the new Burse.</note>

<p>On the door of a staircase leading up to a "pawne"
or covered walk on the south side of the building
there had been set up the arms and crest of Gresham
himself, which some evilly disposed person took it
into his head to deface. A proclamation made by
the mayor (16 Feb., 1569) for the apprehension of the
culprit does not appear from the city's records to
have proved successful.<note place="foot"><p>"A proclamacioun concernyng the cutting of the crest conyzans and
mantell of the arms of S<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> Thomas Gresham."&mdash;Journal 19, fo. 150b;
Letter Book V, fo. 222.</p></note> Some years later (21 March,
1577) the mayor had occasion to issue another proclamation
for the discovery of persons who had
defaced and pulled away "certen peces of timber
fixed to thendes and comers of the seates"<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. ii, fo. 341.</p></note> in the
Royal Exchange, with what result we know not.</p>

<note place="margin">Insurance business carried on at the Royal Exchange.</note>

<p>In 1574 the Court of Aldermen appointed a
committee to confer with Gresham touching the
"assurance" of the Royal Exchange.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 18, fo. 362.</p></note> The connection
between the new Burse and insurance is
remarkable. The principle of insurance policies had<pb n="500" /><anchor id="Pg500" />
been introduced into the city by the Lombards as early
as the thirteenth century,<note place="foot"><p>"Law and Practice of Marine Insurance," by John Duer, LL.D.
(New York, 1845), Lecture ii, p. 33.</p></note> and a Lombard Street
policy became a familiar term.<note place="foot"><p>At the present day the form of policy used at Lloyds and commonly
called the "Lloyd's policy" contains the following clause:&mdash;"and
it is agreed by us the insurers, that this writing or policy of
assurance shall be of as much force and effect as the surest writing or
policy of assurance heretofore made in Lombard Street or in the Royal
Exchange or elsewhere in London."&mdash;Arnould, "Marine Insurance"
(6th ed.), i, 230.</p></note> When the Lombard
Street merchants quitted their old premises for the
more commodious Exchange they carried thither their
insurance business with them, and a part of the new
building was devoted exclusively to this branch of
commerce. A grant of letters patent which Elizabeth
made to Richard Candler for the making of policies
and registering of assurances within the city was
objected to by the Court of Aldermen, as being contrary
to the liberties of the City, and a deputation
was appointed to wait upon the lords of the Privy
Council to have it revoked.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 18, fo. 362b.</p></note> This was early in 1575.
A year later we find Candler making answer to a bill
of fees drawn up by certain aldermen and citizens of
London, respecting his office.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1547-1580), p. 523.</p></note></p>

<p>In order to put an end to the frequent disputes
which arose in the Royal Exchange among merchants
on matters of insurance, the Court of Aldermen
appointed two of their number to consider the difficulty
and to report thereon. They made their report
to the court on the 29th January, 1577.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 19, fos. 166b, 168.</p></note> They had,
in accordance with the oft-repeated desire expressed<pb n="501" /><anchor id="Pg501" /><index index="toc" level1="INSURANCE BUSINESS AT ROYAL EXCHANGE." />
to previous lord mayors by the lords of the Privy
Council, consulted with their brethren the aldermen,
as well as with merchants of the city, both Englishmen
and foreigners, and had drawn up orders agreeable
to those that had hitherto been used in Lombard
Street, to which all countries had been accustomed to
submit. The orders, however, not yet being completed,
the Court of Aldermen decided upon appointing
arbitrators from year to year to deal with all matters
of insurance, and so relieve the lords of the Privy
Council of the trouble which they had hitherto
experienced on that score at a time when they had
weightier matters to attend to. The arbitrators were
to receive one penny in the pound amongst them in all
cases, whether the claim were for whole losses, part,<note place="foot"><p>The reader is here reminded that there is an essential difference
between life policies and fire or marine policies of assurance. The latter,
being policies of indemnity, recovery can be had at law only to the
extent of the actual damage done, whereas in life policies the whole
amount of the policy can be recovered.</p></note>
or averages. Their decision was to bind both assurer
and assured, and they were to sit twice a week
(Monday and Thursday) "in the offyce howse of
assurances" in the Royal Exchange. They were to
be attended by the "register of assurances," whose
business it was to summon witnesses. A poor-box
was to be provided, to which the party assured, on
judgment, should contribute twelve pence.</p>

<note place="margin">Music and football at the Exchange.</note>

<p>On Sundays and holy days the Exchange was
enlivened during a portion of the year with the music
of the city waits, who were ordered by the Court of
Aldermen (April, 1572) to play on their instruments
as they had hitherto been accustomed at the Royal
Exchange, from seven o'clock till eight o'clock in the<pb n="502" /><anchor id="Pg502" />
evening up to the Feast of Pentecost, after which
they were to commence playing at eight p.m., and
"to hold on" till nine p.m. up to Michaelmas.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 17, fo. 300.</p></note> There
is another circumstance connected with the same
building that deserves a passing notice, which is that
football used to be played within its walls, a game
forbidden in 1576 to be played any longer either there
or in any of the city's wards.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 19, fo. 150.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Gresham College and Lectures.</note>

<p>The citizens of London are indebted to Sir
Thomas Gresham for something more than their
Royal Exchange. By will dated 5th July, 1575,
proved and enrolled in the Court of Husting,<note place="foot"><p>Cal. Wills, Court of Hust., London, ii, 698.</p></note>
Gresham disposed of the reversion of the Royal
Exchange and of his mansion-house in the parish of
St. Helen, Bishopsgate, after the decease of his wife,
to the mayor and corporation of the city and to the
wardens and commonalty of the Mercers' Company in
equal moieties in trust (<hi rend="font-style: italic">inter alia</hi>) for the maintenance
of seven lectures on the several subjects of Divinity,
Astronomy, Music, Geometry, Law, Physic and
Rhetoric. In 1596 these two corporate bodies came
into possession of the property, and in the following
year drew up ordinances for the regulation of the
various lectures. According to the terms of Gresham's
will the lectures were delivered at Gresham House.
When Gresham House, which escaped the Fire of
London, became dilapidated, the City and the
Company on more than one occasion petitioned
Parliament for leave to pull it down and to erect
another building on its site. The proposal, however,
was not entertained, but in the year 1767 an Act was<pb n="503" /><anchor id="Pg503" /><index index="toc" level1="GRESHAM COLLEGE." />
passed vesting Gresham House in the Crown for the
purpose of an Excise Office, and providing for the
payment by the Crown to the City and Company of
a perpetual annuity of £500 per annum. For some
time the lectures ceased to be delivered for lack of
accommodation. When they were next delivered it
was at the City of London School, where they continued
until Gresham College was erected in Basinghall
Street.<note place="foot"><p>Printed Report "Gresham College Trust," 29 Oct., 1885.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Act of Uniformity strictly enforced, 1565.</note>

<p>In the meantime Protestantism had been gaining
ground in England as well as on the continent.
Many who in the evil days of the Marian persecution
had sought refuge in Switzerland and Germany had
returned to England as soon as they were assured of
safety under Elizabeth, and had introduced into the
country the religious tenets of Calvin they had learnt
abroad. Elizabeth found herself confronted not only
by Catholics but by Puritans. As she felt herself
seated more strongly on the throne she determined
to enforce more strictly than hitherto the Act of
Uniformity. In 1565 the London clergy were ordered
to wear the surplice and to conform in other particulars.
Between thirty and forty of them&mdash;and those
the most intelligent and active of them&mdash;refused and
resigned their cures. Their congregations supported
them, and thus a large body of good Protestants were
driven into opposition. But there all action against
them ceased. It was otherwise with the Protestants
on the continent, where a determination arrived at in
the same year that Elizabeth enforced the Act of Uniformity,
to suppress heresy, led to the most horrible<pb n="504" /><anchor id="Pg504" />
persecution, and drove many of the inhabitants to
seek refuge in England.</p>

<note place="margin">Gresham's hospitality to Cardinal Chastillon, 1568.</note>

<p>Of the hundreds of foreigners who sought this
country, driven from France or Spain by religious
persecution,<note place="foot"><p>A return made in 1567 by the livery companies of foreigners
residing in the city and liberties gives the number as 3,562.&mdash;Repertory
16, fo. 202. Another authority gives the number as 4,851, of which
3,838 were Dutch.&mdash;Burgon's "Life of Gresham," ii, 242, citing Haynes,
p. 461.</p></note> none was more hospitably received than
the brother of the great Coligny, the Cardinal
Chastillon. The Bishop of London having excused
himself entertaining the cardinal at Fulham, his
eminence was lodged and hospitably treated for a
whole week by Gresham. During his visit he paid a
visit, Huguenot as he was, to the French Church
established in the city, where his co-religionists were
allowed to worship without fear of molestation. He
further paid his host the compliment of visiting the
Exchange, then approaching completion. At the end
of the week he removed to Sion House, where
accommodation had been found for him.<note place="foot"><p>Burgon's "Life of Gresham," ii, 271-275.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city crowded with refugees from the continent.</note>

<p>The influx of refugees from the continent was
far from being an unmixed blessing. Whilst some
settled peacefully down and taught the London artizan
the art of silk-weaving, others betook themselves to
the river's side, where they defied the civic authorities.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fo. 164.</p></note>
A fresh return was ordered to be made of their number.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 116.</p></note>
It became necessary to forbid aliens remaining
in the city more than a day and a night; they might
reside in other places if they liked, but not in the city
of London.<note place="foot"><p>Precept of the mayor to that effect, 19 Oct., 1568.-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 132b.</p></note> Mortality increased so much that a<pb n="505" /><anchor id="Pg505" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY FLOODED WIH POLITICAL REFUGEES." />
committee hud to be appointed (March, 1569) "to
peruse about the cytie where apte and convenient
places maye be had and founde for the buryall of
the deade in tyme of plage and other tymes of gret
deathe," and to report thereon to the Court of
Aldermen.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fo. 451.</p></note> An acre of ground, more or less, near
Bethlem Hospital was subsequently prepared as a
cemetery by the civic authorities,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 180; Letter Book V, fo. 245.</p></note> whilst a friend of
the mayor agreed under certain conditions to enclose
it with a wall, erect a pulpit and make other improvements
at his own cost.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book V, fo. 246.  Holinshed (iv, 234) and others give the
whole credit of providing the cemetery to the liberality of Sir Thomas
Rowe, the mayor.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Prince of Orange receives substantial assistance from the citizens.</note>

<p>In the course of time the persecuted Netherlanders
took heart of grace, encouraged by the gallant
conduct of the Prince of Orange, their leader, no less
than by the active assistance and sympathy of their
brethren in England, who were continually passing to
and fro with munitions of war, in spite of proclamations
to the contrary.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation (15 July, 1568) against suspected persons landing in
England or returning "with any furniture for mayntenaunce of ther
rebellion or other lyke cryme" against the King of Spain.&mdash;Journal 18,
fo. 115; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Letter Book V, fos. 181, 246b.</p></note> "Whilst Elizabeth dribbled
out her secret aid to the Prince of Orange the London
traders sent him half-a-million from their own purses,
a sum equal to a year's revenue of the Crown."<note place="foot"><p>Green, "Hist. of the English People," ii, 418.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The decline of Antwerp London's opportunity.</note>

<note place="margin">The queen applies to the merchant adventurers for a loan.</note>

<p>The decline of Antwerp which followed Alva's
administration marks the foundation of London's
supremacy in the world of commerce. Hitherto the
queen had been accustomed through Gresham, her<pb n="506" /><anchor id="Pg506" />
factor, to raise what money she required by loans from
merchants abroad. Merchant strangers were well
content to lend her money at ten or twelve per cent.,
seeing that the City of London was as often as not
called upon to give bonds for repayment by way of
collateral security.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 15, fos. 162, 164, 166b, 241b, 258, 267b, 297, etc.</p></note> When that door was closed to
her she turned to her own subjects, the Company of
Merchant Adventurers, to whom she had shown considerable
favour. Her first application to this company
for a loan was, to her great surprise, refused. The
matter was afterwards accommodated through the
intervention of Sir Thomas Gresham; and as the
confidence of the city merchants increased, loans were
afterwards frequently negotiated between them and
the Crown, much to the convenience of one party and
to the advantage of the other.<note place="foot"><p>Strype, Stow's "Survey" (ed. 1720), bk. i, p. 283.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The first public lottery, 1567-1569.</note>

<p>As another means of raising money Elizabeth had
resort to a lottery&mdash;the first public lottery ever held
in London, although the game called "The Lott" was
not unknown in the city in the reign of Henry VIII.<note place="foot"><p>Journal II, fo. 253.</p></note>
The lottery was advertised in 1567 as being a very
rich lottery general, without any blanks, containing a
number of good prizes of ready-money, plate and
divers sorts of merchandise, the same having been
valued by expert and skilful men. The lottery was,
as we should say at the present day, "under the
immediate patronage" of the queen herself, and the
proceeds, after deducting expenses, were to be devoted
to the repair of harbours and other public works conducive
to strengthening the realm. Besides the prizes, of<pb n="507" /><anchor id="Pg507" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FIRST PUBLIC LOTTERY." />
which a long list is set out in the city's records, there
were to be three "welcomes" or bonuses given to the
first three winners of lots. The first person to whom
a lot should happen to fall was to have for "welcome"
a piece of silver-gilt plate of the value of £50, and
the second and third fortunate drawers were to have
respectively, in addition to their prizes, a piece of gilt
plate of the value of £20. The prizes, the chief of
which amounted to £5,000 sterling, although the
winner was to receive only £3,000 in cash, the rest
being taken out in plate and tapestry,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fos. 55-58; Letter Book V, fos. 115b-117b.</p></note> were exhibited
in Cheapside at the sign of the Queen's Arms, the house
of Antony Derick, goldsmith to Elizabeth and engraver
to the Mint in this and the preceding reign.<note place="foot"><p>Price's "London Bankers" (enlarged edition), p. 51.</p></note> The
mayor and aldermen agreed to put into the lottery
thirty "billes or lottes" at the least under one posy,
viz.:&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">God preserve the Cytye of London quod M and A.</hi>
Any profit that might arise from the lots was to be
equally divided between them.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book V, fo. 139.</p></note></p>

<p>The livery companies of the city were also invited
to subscribe to the lottery as well as the Company of
Merchant Adventurers.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1547-1580), p. 314.</p></note> On the 4th August the livery
of the Merchant Taylors' Company were summoned
to their hall to declare the amount each individual was
ready to venture&mdash;"all under our posy in the name of
this Common Hall," the posy subsequently determined
upon being the following:&mdash;</p>

<lg>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">"One byrde in hande is worthe two in the woode,</l>
<l rend="margin-left: 2">Yff wee have the greate lott it will do us good."<note place="foot"><p>Clode, "Early Hist. of the Guild of Merchant Taylors," pt. ii,
pp. 229-230.</p></note></l>
</lg>

<pb n="508" /><anchor id="Pg508" />

<p>The "reading" of the lottery was postponed till
the 10th January, 1569.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 133b.</p></note> It took place at the west
door of St. Paul's, commencing on the 11th day of
that month, and continued day and night until the
6th May following.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iv, 234.</p></note> It was reported at the time that
Elizabeth withdrew a large sum of the prize-money
for her own use previous to the drawing of the lots,
and this report, whether well founded or not, created
no little disgust among the subscribers.<note place="foot"><p>"Mesmes j'entendz que de la blanque, qu'on a tirée ces jours
passés en ceste ville, ceste Royne retirera pour elle plus de cent mille
livres esterlin, qui sont 33,000 escuz; de quoy le monde murumre assés
pour la diminution qu'ilz trouvent aulx bénéfices qu'ilz esperoient de
leurs billetz"&mdash;wrote De la Motlie Fénélon, the French ambassador in
London.&mdash;Cooper's "Recueil des Dépéches, etc., des Ambassadeurs de
France (Paris and London, 1838-1840)," i, 155.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">English merchants in Antwerp arrested by order of Alva, 1568.</note>

<note place="margin">Elizabeth retaliates by seizing treasure on board Spanish vessels.</note>

<p>Before the close of 1568 Alva had severed the
last links connecting England with the Low Countries
by suddenly seizing and imprisoning all English merchants
found at Antwerp on the ground that certain
Spanish treasure-ships had been detained in England.
Such conduct on his part was characterized by
Elizabeth as "verie straunge and hertofore in no tyme
used betwixt the Crowne of England and the House
of Burgondye w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi> owt some manner of former conferrence
proceedyng and intelligence had of the
myndes and intentions of the prynces themselves
on both sides," and she forthwith issued a proclamation
for the seizure of Spanish vessels and
merchants found in English ports by way of reprisal.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, 6 Jan., 1569.&mdash;Journal 19, fo. 139; Letter Book V,
fo. 210.</p></note>
She was careful to show that any former detention of
Spanish vessels served as a mere pretence for Alva's
conduct. Certain Spanish vessels of small tonnage,<pb n="509" /><anchor id="Pg509" /><index index="toc" level1="SEIZURE OF SPANISH VESSELS." />
called "zabras," had, it was true, entered English
harbours in the west country, and the bullion and
merchandise had been discharged on English soil; but
all this had been done in order to prevent the ships
and cargo falling into the hands of the French ships
which threatened them. Some of the treasure had
been even "borrowed"; but this was not contrary to
the honorable usage of princes in their own dominions.
The Spanish ambassador had called upon her majesty
to ask that the vessels and cargo might be given up,
"pretending the monye to appertaine to the king his
maister," which her majesty had declared her willingness
to assent to as soon as she should have had
communication from the west country. The ambassador,
who was asked to return in four or five
days to receive the ships and treasure, had failed to
appear, and her surprise was great to find that orders
had been given for the arrest of her subjects at
Antwerp on the very day (29 Oct.) that the Spanish
ambassador was with her majesty. Such was the
account of the matter as given in the queen's proclamation
to the citizens of London. But there are
other and contradictory accounts. Whoever may
have been the rightful owner of the treasure, which
in all probability was on its way to Flanders for
payment of Alva's soldiers,<note place="foot"><p>See letter from Sir Arthur Champernowne, William Hawkins and
others to the lords of the council. 1 Jan., 1569.&mdash;Cal. State Papers
Dom. (1547-1580), p. 326.</p></note> the opportunity of
dealing a blow to Spain and at the same time of
replenishing the Exchequer at home afforded by the
presence of the ships in English waters was thought
too good to be lost.</p>

<pb n="510" /><anchor id="Pg510" />

<note place="margin">Order to seize Flemish merchants and their goods in London, Jan., 1569.</note>

<p>On the 5th January the mayor received orders
from Sir Nicholas Bacon to seize all Flemings' goods
to the queen's use, inasmuch as it was quite possible
that what had taken place in Flanders had been
done without the King of Spain's commission. The
following day the mayor informed the council that he
had arrested the bodies and goods of certain merchant
strangers in the city.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1547-1580), p. 326.</p></note> Throughout the greater part of
the month frequent letters passed between the city,
the merchant adventurers, the merchants of the
staple and the lords of the council concerning Alva's
proceedings and measures to be taken by way of
reprisal. The citizens showed themselves very
anxious to devise measures of retaliation and to avail
themselves to the utmost of the opportunity afforded
them of avenging themselves of their foreign rivals,
as the following memorial signed by the mayor and
nine of the principal merchants of the city proves:&mdash;<note place="foot"><p>Cotton MS., Galba C, iii, fo. 151b. This letter was signed by
John Gresham, Thomas Offley, John White, Roger Martyn, Leonell
Duckett, Thomas Heaton, Richard Wheler, Thomas Aldersey and
Francis Beinson.</p></note></p>

<p>"First, we doe thinck it very needfull and necessary
that w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> all possible speed the bodies, shipps
and goodes of all the subiects of the said king be
had under arrest, and their bodies to be sequestred
from their houses, comptinghouses, books, warehouses
and goods; and they themselves to be
committed unto severall and sure custodie and
keeping. And that alsoe comission may be granted
to sage persons to enquire and trie out all coulorable
transports and contracts don since the <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">XX</hi><hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> of
December last by any of the subiects of the said<pb n="511" /><anchor id="Pg511" /><index index="toc" level1="THE DUKE OF ALVA'S ENVOY IN THE CITY." />
king or by any other nation. And that a proclamation
be made by the queene's ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">tes</hi> aucthorite
forthw<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> for the avoiding of collorable bargaines,
transports and contracts hereafter to be made."</p>

<p>Thomas Rowe<note place="foot"><p>Citizen and Merchant Taylor: Alderman of the Wards of Portsoken
and Bishopsgate; Sheriff, 1560-61. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ob.</hi> 2 Sept., 1570. Buried
in Hackney Church. He bestowed the sum of £100 for the relief
of members of his company "usinge the brode shire or ell rowinge of
the pearch or making of garmentes" during his lifetime, and some
landed estate in the city by his will for like purpose.&mdash;Letter Book V,
fo. 274b; Cal. of Wills, Court of Husting, ii, 686.</p></note> (he had not yet received the
honour of knighthood), who was mayor at the time,
happened to be a connection by marriage of Sir
Thomas Gresham, having married Mary, the eldest
daughter of Sir John Gresham, of Titsey, Sir Thomas's
uncle. It was owing to this connection that the
mayor received information of Alva's arbitrary proceedings
before the news reached the ears of Secretary
Cecil; for Gresham's factor at Antwerp, Richard
Clough, had lost no time in despatching a special
messenger to his master, who, immediately after
hearing the news, broke in upon the mayor's slumbers
at twelve o'clock on the night of the 3rd January in
order to communicate the same to him. The next
morning the mayor wrote to Sir William Cecil
informing him of what had occurred and how under
the circumstances he (the mayor) had taken upon
himself to stay the despatch of letters abroad for a
while.<note place="foot"><p>Letter printed (from original among State Papers Dom.) in
Burgon's "Life of Gresham," ii, 287.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Alva's envoy demands restitution.</note>

<p>Towards the end of January, 1569, the Duke of
Alva sent over an agent, Monsieur D'Assoleville, to
demand the restitution of the treasure. The mayor
deputed John Gresham and another to escort the<pb n="512" /><anchor id="Pg512" />
envoy from Gravesend to London, where he was
lodged at Crosby Place, at that time the mansion
house of William Bond, alderman of Candlewick
Street Ward.<note place="foot"><p>Sir Thomas Rowe, mayor, to Secretary Cecil. 23 Jan., 1569.&mdash;Cal.
State Papers Dom. (1547-1580), p. 329; Burgon's "Life of
Gresham," ii, 295-296.</p></note> At first he demanded an audience
with the queen herself, but was fain to be content
with a reference to her council.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, 25 Jan.</p></note> The treasure in the
meantime had been removed to London for greater
security.<note place="foot"><p>Cooper's "Dépêches, etc., des Ambassadeurs de France,"
i, 176-177.</p></note> Negotiations proving fruitless the agent
returned to Antwerp, "having succeeded in obtaining
from Elizabeth nothing beyond the assurance that
she was ready to surrender the treasure when his
master promised indemnity to all her subjects in the
Low Countries, and agreed solemnly to ratify the
ancient treaty of alliance between the Crown of
England and the House of Burgundy."<note place="foot"><p>Burgon's "Life of Gresham," ii, 297.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Gresham suggests minting the Spanish treasure, 14 Aug., 1569.</note>

<p>That such a large amount of treasure should be
lying idle did not commend itself to the mind of so
astute a financier as Sir Thomas Gresham. He
accordingly suggested to Sir William Cecil by letter
(14 Aug., 1569) that the queen should cause it to be
minted into her own coin, and thereby make a profit
of £3,000 or £4,000. As for repayment, her majesty
could effect it by way of exchange, to her great profit,
or give bonds for a year or more to the merchants
who owned the money, and who, in Gresham's opinion,
would willingly accede to such proposal.<note place="foot"><p>Lansd. MS., No. xii, fo. 16b.</p></note> Bold as
this suggestion was, it appears, nevertheless, to have
been carried into execution.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 22.</p></note></p>

<pb n="513" /><anchor id="Pg513" /><index index="toc" level1="MEASURES OF RETALIATION AGAINST SPAIN." />

<note place="margin">The City Courts closed to Spanish suitors, 11 July, 1570.</note>

<p>The hardships already experienced by Spanish
merchants from stoppage of commercial intercourse
with England must have been materially increased the
following year by an order of the Court of Aldermen
(11 July, 1570) to the effect that all matters and suits
brought by merchant strangers, subjects of the King
of Spain, in any of the Queen's Majesty's Courts
within the city of London for the recovery of a
debt should be stayed, and no manner of arrest or
attachment allowed until further notice, unless the
stranger suing were a denizen or a member of the
Church.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 17, fo. 36b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Failure of efforts to effect a mutual restoration of goods seized.</note>

<note place="margin">Spanish goods ordered to be sold.</note>

<note place="margin">The respective claims of England and Spain referred to arbitration.</note>

<p>By proclamation made the last day of June, 1570,
English merchants who had suffered loss by Alva's
proceedings were desired to make a return of such
loss to the officers of one or other of the cities or
towns of London, Southampton, Bristol, Chester,
Newcastle, Hull or Ipswich, as they should find it
most convenient,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 247b; Letter Book V, fo. 301.</p></note> and on the 20th July following
every Englishman into whose hands any goods
belonging to Spanish subjects might have come was
ordered to make a certificate under his hand and seal
into the Court of the Admiralty, in the city of London,
for her majesty to take further order thereon as
should be thought meet.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 257.</p></note> Negotiations, which had
been renewed for mutual restitution, again broke
down, for when the terms on which restitution was to
be effected were to be reduced to writing, or, in
the language of the record, "<hi rend="font-style: italic">put into mundum</hi>,"<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 390b.</p></note> the
Spanish commissioners were found to have no<pb n="514" /><anchor id="Pg514" />
authority to arrange matters, whilst at the same time
they wished to introduce clauses and conditions
which Elizabeth could in no wise accept. Seeing
that she was being played with, and knowing that
much of the goods of English merchants seized in
Spain and the Netherlands had already been sold, the
queen determined to put up for sale the Spanish
merchandise which for three years had been in
English hands. Proclamation to this effect was made
the 14th January, 1572.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 390b.</p></note> The queen showed every
desire to treat the Spanish merchants with consideration.
The sale was entrusted to Spanish
subjects, who, upon their oath, were to make sale of
all the ships, goods, wares and merchandise arrested,
to the utmost advantage they could; and Spanish
owners were allowed, either by themselves, their
factor or attorney, freely to enter the realm within
thirty days after the date of the proclamation to
attend the sale, provided they made no attempt
against her majesty or the peace of the country and
departed immediately the sale was over. This
proclamation, coupled with the hopelessness of Alva's
case and the manifestation of discontent displayed by
his own ruined merchants, led to articles being drawn
up (25 Mar.) between Elizabeth and the King of
Spain for an adjustment of their respective claims.
Sir Thomas Gresham had previously (4 Feb.) been
directed by letter from Lord Burghley and Sir Walter
Mildmay to deliver up certain bonds of the Governor
and Company of Merchant Adventurers to be cancelled
now that the whole matter was to be referred to
arbitration.<note place="foot"><p>Add. MS., No. 5, 755, fo. 58.</p></note></p>

<pb n="515" /><anchor id="Pg515" /><index index="toc" level1="THE RISING IN THE NORTH." />

<note place="margin">Insurrection of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, 1569.</note>

<p>To add to the queen's difficulties, Mary, who had
been deposed from the throne of Scotland and had
sought shelter in England, was importuning her for
assistance for the recovery of her lost crown. Whilst
Elizabeth hesitated either to replace her rival in power
or to set her at liberty, the Earls of Northumberland
and Westmoreland endeavoured to carry out a scheme
for marrying Mary to the Duke of Norfolk and forcing
Elizabeth to acknowledge her as successor to the
crown of England. The Duke of Norfolk obeyed
the queen's summons to attend the court, and was
committed to the Tower (Oct., 1569).<note place="foot"><p>In the following year he was removed to the Charterhouse, but
being discovered in correspondence with the deposed Queen of Scots was
again placed in the Tower. He was tried and convicted of treason, and
after some delay executed on Tower Hill.&mdash;Holinshed, iv, 254, 262, 264,
267.</p></note> The earls
refused to obey the summons, and rose in insurrection.
On the 24th November they were proclaimed traitors.<note place="foot"><p>The proclamation, which is set out in Journal 19, fo. 202b (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi>
Letter Book V, fo. 267b), gives in detail the rise and progress of the
rebellion.</p></note>
Troops were sent against them, but they cowardly
left their supporters to their own fate and fled to
Scotland. The rebellion, fruitless as it proved to be,
caused no little excitement in the city.</p>

<note place="margin">Measures taken for safe-guarding the city.</note>

<p>The same day that the earls were proclaimed
traitors the Mayor of London issued his precept to
the several aldermen, enjoining them to take steps
for safe-guarding the city and taking into custody all
rogues, masterless men and vagabonds.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 202; Letter Book V, fo. 267.</p></note> On the
following day another precept was issued to the
several livery companies for providing a certain
number of soldiers, "well and sufficientlie furnyshed
w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> a jerkyn and a paire of gally sloppes of broad<pb n="516" /><anchor id="Pg516" />
clothe, collor watchet, one calyver w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> flaske and
tuchebox, a moryan, a sworde and a dagger."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 202; Letter Book V, fo. 267.</p></note>
The soldiers were to be ready to serve her majesty
at an hour's warning. The Chamberlain received
orders to amend the several gates of the city and the
portcullises belonging to them, as well as to repair
the city's guns and put them in readiness, and lay in
a stock of powder and shot to serve as occasion
should require.<note place="foot"><p>Letter Book V, fo. 269.</p></note> By the 12th December all fear of
immediate danger had passed away, and the livery
companies were ordered to receive back the armour
and weapons supplied to the soldiers and to keep
them in their hall. The men were to be dismissed to
their several industries, but still to hold themselves in
readiness for service at an hour's warning if occasion
should require them. A week later the soldiers were
dismissed to their houses, those who had no house
being allowed sixpence a day until called upon for
active service.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fo. 206b; Letter Book V, fo. 270b; Repertory 16,
fo. 522b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Papal Bull of excommunication against Elizabeth, 1570.</note>

<p>Although the rising in the north had failed, the
Catholics were not without hope. They were
encouraged by the issue of a Papal Bull excommunicating
Elizabeth and absolving her subjects from
their allegiance. This Bull was affixed to the door of
the Bishop of London's palace by a man named John
Felton. The queen was alarmed. She believed that
the long-threatened union against her of the Catholic
powers had at length been effected. Felton was
seized and tried at the Guildhall. He was found<pb n="517" /><anchor id="Pg517" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BATTLE OF LEPANTO." />
guilty, and paid the penalty of his rashness by being
hanged, drawn and quartered.<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iv, 254.</p></note> His exemplary
punishment failed, however, to put a stop to Catholic
intrigues against Elizabeth.</p>

<note place="margin">Rejoicing in the city after the battle of Lepanto, 7 Oct., 1571.</note>

<p>The defeat of the Turkish fleet at Lepanto by
Don John of Austria (7 Oct., 1571) was commemorated
two days later in London by a thanksgiving service
at St. Paul's,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, 262.</p></note> which was attended by the mayor, Sir
William Allen,<note place="foot"><p>From Hertfordshire, alderman of Billingsgate Ward.</p></note> the aldermen and members of the
companies in their liveries. In the evening of the
same day bonfires were lighted in the streets of the
city by precept of the mayor.<note place="foot"><p>Dated 8 Nov.&mdash;Journal 19, fo. 370b.</p></note> The immediate effect
of the victory was the release of a large number of
captives (variously estimated at 12,000 and 14,000)<note place="foot"><p>Holinshed, iv, 263.</p></note>
from Turkish slavery, for whose redemption the citizens
were constantly being called upon to subscribe.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 17, fos. 8b, 23, 27b, 29. 243, etc.; Repertory 19, fos.
24b, 154, etc.; City Records known as "Remembrancia" (Analytical
Index), pp. 51-55.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Peace and commercial prosperity, 1572.</note>

<p>Whilst the Low Countries were winning their
way to freedom from the Spanish yoke, and France
was suffering the horrors of Saint Bartholomew's
day (24 Aug., 1572), England remained tranquil, and
the city merchant had little cause to complain,
except, it might be, on account of the number of
strangers who rivalled him in his business.<note place="foot"><p>Stranger denizens, carrying on a handicraft in the city, had
recently preferred a Bill in Parliament against several of the livery
companies. They were persuaded, however, to drop it, and refer their
grievance to the Court of Aldermen.&mdash;Repertory 17, fos. 302b, 335,
337. A return made by the mayor (10 Nov., 1571) of the strangers
then living in London and Southwark and liberties thereof gives the
total number as 4,631.&mdash;Cal. State Papers Dom. (1547-1580), p. 427.</p></note> For the<pb n="518" /><anchor id="Pg518" />
better preservation of peace members of the French
and the Dutch churches were ordered (28 Sept.) not
to leave their houses after 9 o'clock at night.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 17, fo. 372.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The shifting policy of Elizabeth towards Spain and France, 1572-1574.</note>

<p>So long as the Spanish king turned a deaf ear to
the exhortations of the Pope, and refused to make a
descent upon England, Elizabeth was able to cope
with Catholicism at home by peaceful measures. But
the time was approaching when she could no longer
refuse to give practical assistance to her struggling
co-religionists on the continent. The Netherlands
had for some time past been preparing for open revolt
against the barbarous government of Alva. In 1572 a
party seized Brill, and thus laid the foundation of the
Dutch Republic. It wanted but the active adhesion of
Elizabeth to enable the French to drive the Spaniards
out of the country, but this the queen was as yet unwilling
to give. Two years later (1574) she offered
her services to effect an understanding between Spain
and the Netherlands, but her mediation proved futile.
Both in 1572 and 1574 there are signs of military
preparations having taken place in the city. In the
first mentioned year Elizabeth held a review of the
city troops in Greenwich Park.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 19, fos. 407-408b, 417-417b; Repertory 17, fos. 292,
298b, 307, 308.</p></note> In 1574 the city
was called upon to furnish 400 soldiers for the queen's
service, and steps were taken to allot to the livery
companies their quota of men or money in view of
future calls.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. i, fos. 133b, 143b; Repertory 18, fo. 224b.</p></note> A store of gunpowder was also laid up.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. i, fo. 156b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Piracy rampant, 1575-1576.</note>

<p>If one thing more than another was calculated
to precipitate a rupture between England and Spain it<pb n="519" /><anchor id="Pg519" /><index index="toc" level1="FURTHER CALLS FOR MONEY AND MEN." />
was the action of English seamen, who roved the seas
and indirectly rendered assistance to the Netherlanders
by plundering Spanish vessels, in spite of all
proclamations to the contrary.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. i, fo. 252; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, pt. ii, fo. 280b.</p></note> The Londoner was
not behind-hand in this predatory warfare.</p>

<note place="margin">A loan of£30,000, June, 1575.</note>

<note place="margin">A city Chamberlain dismissed from office.</note>

<p>In June, 1575, the queen borrowed a sum of
£30,000 from the citizens on security.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. i, fos. 228b, 239.</p></note> The money
was subscribed by the wealthier class of citizens, and
a moiety of the loan was repaid in little more than a
twelvemonth.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 19, fo. 98.</p></note> Whatever may have been her faults,
Elizabeth honestly paid her debts, and when she discovered
in 1577 that money which she had repaid to
certain officials had not reached the hands of the
original creditor, she forthwith issued a proclamation
commanding all such creditors to send in their claims
in writing to the chief officer of her majesty's household.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. ii, fo. 371.</p></note>
It is difficult to dissociate altogether this proclamation
from the removal of George Heton from
the office of Chamberlain of the City three months
afterwards.<note place="foot"><p>He was removed by order of Common Council, 13 Dec., <hi rend="font-style: italic">pre
diversis magnis rebus dictam civitatem et negotia ejusdem tangentibus</hi>.&mdash;Journal
20, pt. ii, fo. 376b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The city called upon to furnish soldiers, 1578.</note>

<p>In February, 1578, the City was called upon to
provide 2,000 arquebusiers. Refusal was useless,
although an attempt was made to get the number
reduced to 500. The mayor had scarcely issued his
precept to the aldermen to raise the men before he
received another order for 2,000 to be trained as
directed in handling and using their weapons and kept<pb n="520" /><anchor id="Pg520" />
in readiness for future service.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. ii, fos. 388b, 389, 394-395b. The queen to the
mayor, etc., of London, 12 March.&mdash;Cal. State Papers Dom. (1547-1580),
p. 586.</p></note> One hundred and fifty
men were ordered (12 June) to be ready at an hour's
notice for foreign service.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. ii, fo. 409b.</p></note> Strangers and foreigners
were not exempt.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 404, 408b, 412.</p></note> Some of the city companies were
slow in paying their quota of expenses of fitting out
the men, and pressure had to be brought to bear on
them by the Court of Aldermen.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 19, fo. 346b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Count Casimir at Gresham House, Jan., 1579.</note>

<note place="margin">Death of Sir Thomas Gresham, 21 Nov., 1579.</note>

<note place="margin">Count Casimir presented by the city with a gift of 500 marks.</note>

<p>In the following year Casimir, Count Palatine
of the Rhine, paid a visit to England to answer a
charge brought against him by the English envoy in
Holland, of having used forces against the Netherlanders
which had been despatched from these shores
for their support. On the evening of Thursday, the
22nd January, 1579, the Count landed at the Tower,
where he was received by a party of noblemen and
others, among whom we may conjecture was the
Mayor of London and representatives of the city.<note place="foot"><p>This conjecture is made from the fact of a precept having been
issued on the 20th Jan. for certain persons to furnish themselves with
velvet coats, chains and horses, and a suitable suite, to wait upon the
lord mayor on the following Saturday.&mdash;Journal 20, pt. ii, fo. 404b.</p></note>
Thence he was conducted by the light of cressets to
Gresham's house, in Bishopsgate Street, where he was
received with music and lodged and feasted by the
worthy owner for three days. The honour thus
shown to Gresham is only one more proof of the
esteem and respect in which he was universally held
by all parties, and, "in truth," as his biographer
justly remarks,<note place="foot"><p>Burgon's "Life of Gresham," ii, 451-452.</p></note> "his great experience, his long and<pb n="521" /><anchor id="Pg521" /><index index="toc" level1="COUNT CASIMIR ENTERTAINED BY GRESHAM." />
familiar intercourse with men of all grades and professions,
from princes and nobles&mdash;with whom ...
he was on as intimate a footing as the impassable
barrier of rank will permit&mdash;to the lowliest of his
own dependants, the knowledge of men and manners
which he must have derived from foreign travel, and
his acquaintance with all the languages of civilised
Europe, must have rendered him, towards the close
of his life especially, as favourable a specimen as
could have been selected of the English gentleman
of that day." Casimir's reception was one of the
last acts of public service performed by Gresham, for
before the close of the year he had died (21 Nov.).
On Sunday (25 Jan.) the Count was conducted to
Westminster for an interview with the queen, after
which lodgings were assigned to him in Somerset
House. The court of Common Council had already
(23 Jan.) voted "Duke Cassimerus" a gratification
"in moneye or anye other thinge" to the value of
500 marks.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, pt. ii, fos. 464, 480.</p></note> His visit was one round of feasting,
hunting and sight-seeing; one day dining with the
lord mayor, another with the merchants of the
Steelyard; one day hunting at Hampton Court, and
another day witnessing athletic sports at Westminster.
That the Count succeeded in clearing his character
may be surmised from the fact of his receiving the
Order of the Garter before his departure.<note place="foot"><p>Continuation of Holinshed, iv, 315.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The plague in the city, 1580-1583.</note>

<p>In the following year the plague, which had been
very virulent towards the end of 1577, and from which
the city was seldom entirely free, appeared at Rye
(June, 1580). A twelvemonth later it was raging in<pb n="522" /><anchor id="Pg522" />
London, but as the weather grew colder its virulence
abated, allowing of the resumption of the lord mayor's
feast. The respite was short. In the spring of 1582
it was again rife in the city, increasing in fatality
during the hot season and continuing until the winter
of 1583.<note place="foot"><p>City Records known as "Remembrancia" (Printed Analytical
Index), pp. 306, 330, 331, 350-352; Journal 20, pt. ii, fos. 373, 379, 407.</p></note> Business was often at a standstill, the law
courts had to be removed to the country, and the
sittings of the London Husting suspended.<note place="foot"><p>Remembrancia (Index), pp. 207, 331, 334; Journal 21, fo. 235b.</p></note></p>

<p>St. Paul's Churchyard, which served as the burial
ground to no less than twenty-three city parishes,
became overcrowded and greatly added to the insanitary
condition of the city by its shallow graves.
The mayor informed the lords of the council of this
state of affairs by letter (15 May, 1582), in which he
says that scarcely any grave was then made without
exposing corpses, and that the heat of the crowds
standing over the shallow graves caused noxious exhalations.
It was currently reported at the time that
the gravediggers were the cause of the shallow graves
"as being desirous to have the infection spred that
they might gaine by burieng."<note place="foot"><p>Remembrancia, vol. i, No. 331.</p></note></p>
</div>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="523" /><anchor id="Pg523" />
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XVIII.</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" level1="PREPARATIONS FOR WAR." /><head></head>
<note place="margin">Preparations for war.</note>

<p>The time was fast approaching when the queen
would find herself unable any longer to maintain her
frequent cry to the council board, "No war, my lords,
no war!" and she began to concert measures to
frustrate any attempt that might be made to attack
her crown and realm by the subtle device of the
Pope's emissaries or the more open hostility of
Philip.</p>

<note place="margin">Troubles in Ireland, 1579-1583.</note>

<p>There were two ways in which the Pope and
Spain could attack England, the one by making a
descent upon the coast, the other by undermining
the loyalty of the queen's subjects by the aid of missionaries.
A descent upon the English coast was, for
the present at least, out of the question, but it was
possible to wound England by fostering insurrection
in Ireland. Accordingly, in 1579, a large force landed
at Limerick under the authority of the Pope. It
was, however, overpowered and destroyed by Lord
Grey, the lord deputy.<note place="foot"><p>A reference to this defeat is to be found in the Dublin Assembly
Roll under the year 1581.&mdash;"Cal. of Ancient Records of Dublin" (ed.
by John T. Gilbert, 1891), ii, 155.</p></note></p>

<p>Then followed the rebellion under the Earl of
Desmond, who six years before had regained his
liberty on a promise to use his influence to destroy
the Catholic religion in Ireland.<note place="foot"><p>Bright, "Hist. of England," ii, 539.</p></note> Throughout the<pb n="524" /><anchor id="Pg524" />
Desmond rebellion the Londoners were constantly
being called upon to furnish men and munition of
war. The trouble was protracted by the landing of
a force of 800 men from Spain, with the connivance,
if not with the authority, of Philip. When the
rebellion was suppressed distress drove many Irish to
England, and the city became their chief refuge.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fos. 19, 34, 52, 53, 69b-71b, 78b, etc.; Repertory 20,
fos. 90, 117, 117b, 119b, etc.; Remembrancia (Analytical Index),
pp. 230-236.</p></note> A
special day was appointed for apprehending "all
suche rogishe and begging Ireishe people as well
men weomen as children" as should be found
wandering abroad in the city,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fo. 329b.</p></note> and steps were taken
subsequently to convey all Irish beggars to Bristol
with the view of sending them back to their native
land.<note place="foot"><p>Among Chamber Accounts <hi rend="font-style: italic">circa</hi> 1585 we find the following:&mdash;"Pd.
the x of Dec. by order of Courte to Roger Warffeld Treasuro<hi rend="vertical-align: super">r</hi> of
Bridewell towards the conveyinge of all the Irishe begging people in
and nere London to the Citie of Bristowe v<hi rend="vertical-align: super">1.</hi>"&mdash;Chamber Accounts,
Town Clerk's Office, vol. ii, fo. 17.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The Jesuits in the city, 1580-1581.</note>

<p>Whilst appealing to force to accomplish their
object in Ireland, the Catholics resorted to intrigue to
gain the same object in England and Scotland. For
some years past there had been a steady flow from
the continent of seminary priests, who worked silently
and secretly making converts to the old religion.
Every precaution was taken to prevent their inculcating
their dangerous opinions into the minds of the
inhabitants of the city and drawing them off from
their allegiance to the queen and to the established
Church. The aldermen were instructed to make
return of those in their ward who refused to attend<pb n="525" /><anchor id="Pg525" /><index index="toc" level1="JESUITS IN THE CITY." />
church. This was in 1568.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 16, fo. 350.</p></note> In 1574 all strangers
who had crept into the city under colour of religion
and were found to be of no church were ordered to
leave.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 18, fo. 167.</p></note> In the following year (9 June, 1575) every
stranger was called upon to subscribe the Articles of
religion before he was allowed to take up his residence
within the city, and those who refused to subscribe
or to attend church were to give bond for their
appearance before her Majesty's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes to answer such matters as should
be objected against them.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 20, fo. 219b.</p></note> The aldermen were
instructed to make diligent search in their several
wards for such as held conventicles under colour of
religion and inter-meddled with matters of State and
civil governance.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fo. 81b; Repertory 20, fo. 1b.</p></note> In 1580 a regular Jesuit mission,
under two priests, Campion and Parsons, was despatched
to England as part of an organised Catholic
scheme. Campion had at one time been a fellow
of St. John's College, Oxford. Their first step was
to remove a difficulty under which devout Catholics
had laboured ever since the issue of the Bull of
excommunication against Elizabeth in 1571. That
Bull had reduced them to the necessity of choosing
between disobedience to the Church and treason to
the queen. The new missionaries helped them out
of the dilemma by explaining that the censures of the
Church only applied to heretics; Catholics might
feign allegiance and the Church would say nothing.</p>

<note place="margin">The Recusancy Laws, 1581.</note>

<p>Under these circumstances it can scarcely be
wondered at that the government proceeded to strong<pb n="526" /><anchor id="Pg526" />
measures&mdash;A proclamation was issued requiring
English parents to remove their children from foreign
seminaries, and declaring that to harbour Jesuit priests
was to harbour rebels;<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fo. 90.</p></note> whilst parliament imposed
fines upon all who refused to attend the service of
the established Church, in addition to the penalties
imposed in 1571 upon those who claimed to absolve
subjects from their allegiance and to receive them into
the Church of Rome. In the city a strict watch was
again ordered to be kept on all those who failed to
attend regularly their parish church.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 114b, 135, 290, 322.</p></note> It was further
proposed to appoint special preachers to counteract
the baneful influence of the Jesuit priest, and the
Bishop of London was ordered to make a list of the
best preachers and to appoint them districts.<note place="foot"><p>Remembrancia (Analytical Index), pp. 364, 365.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Special preachers appointed for the city, 1581-1582.</note>

<p>These instructions Bishop Aylmer forwarded to
the lord mayor with a request for a contribution to
enable him and his associates, the dean of St. Paul's
and the dean of Windsor, to carry them into effect.
The mayor replied (6 Sept., 1581) that, as for himself,
his office was already so burdensome, both in work
and expense, that it would go hard with him if
he was called upon to pay more than any other
parishioner in a Church matter. Both he and his
brethren the aldermen were no less desirous than others
to promote the knowledge of true religion and to inculcate
obedience to the queen by lectures in the city,
but the commons would have to be consulted first. He
enclosed a list of lectures already established in the
several parishes, and drew attention to the great
yearly charge incurred by the companies and private<pb n="527" /><anchor id="Pg527" /><index index="toc" level1="SPECIAL PREACHERS FOR THE CITY." />
persons in the city in maintaining students at the
universities to serve the Church in the office of
preaching and reading.<note place="foot"><p>As early as 1554 students had been supported by the Corporation
and the Companies at the Universities.&mdash;Repertory 13, fos. 144b, 148,
150b.</p></note> This expense, the mayor
said, warranted the City and the Companies asking
to be no further burdened. The writer concluded
by intimating that, however willing the corporation
might be to assist in the good work, its ability to
do so had been much diminished by the indiscreet
demeanour of the bishop's own chaplain, Mr. Dyos,
who had recently defamed the citizens in a public
sermon at Paul's Cross, "as favorers of userers, of the
familye of love and puritanes," saying "that if the
appointing of preachers were committed to us we
wold appointe preachers such as should defend
usirie, the familie of love and puritanisme as they
call it." The City was liable to make mistakes, just
as the bishop himself had made a mistake in appointing
so indiscreet a person for his chaplain, but in other
respects they had no cause to reproach themselves
in the matter of appointments. In conclusion they
desired his lordship to take order for the reparation
of their good fame.</p>

<p>Hitherto the City had received no direct communications
from the Privy Council on the subject,
but three days after the date of the lord mayor's
letter to the Bishop of London the lords of the
council made a direct appeal to the mayor and
aldermen suggesting that a collection should be
made among the clergy and other inhabitants of
the city in order to "oppose the supersticion of<pb n="528" /><anchor id="Pg528" />
popery w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">ch</hi> by the coming over of divers Jesuits
and seminarie preistes hath ben of late much increased."<note place="foot"><p>Rembrancia, i, 250, 256 (Analytical Index, pp. 365, 366). Another
difference shortly occurred between the corporation and the Bishop of
London in October of this year. A dispute arose between them as to who
was responsible for keeping St. Paul's Cathedral in repair, each party
endeavouring to throw the burden upon the other (<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, Analytical Index,
pp. 323-327); and in the following March (1582) Bishop Aylmer found
cause to complain by letter of unbecoming treatment by the mayor, both
of the bishop and his clergy, and threatened, unless matters changed for
the better, to admonish the mayor publicly at Paul's Cross, "where the
lord mayor must sit, not as a judge to control, but as a scholar to learn,
and the writer, not as John Aylmer to be thwarted, but as John London,
to teach him and all London."&mdash;(<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">ibid.</hi>, pp. 128-129).</p></note>
Little appears to have been done in the
matter by the civic authorities until the beginning of
the next year, when the first step was taken by the
appointment of a committee (25 Jan., 1582).<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 20, fo. 282.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Arrest and execution of Campion.</note>

<p>Campion meanwhile had been arrested and subjected
to cruel torture. He was eventually executed.
Parsons, his companion, escaped to the continent, where
he continued to carry on an intrigue against the life
of Elizabeth in conjunction with Allen, who some
years before had established the famous seminary at
Donay for the purpose of keeping up a supply of
Jesuit priests for England.</p>

<note place="margin">Breach with Spain, Jan., 1584.</note>

<p>In 1583&mdash;soon after Edward Osborne<note place="foot"><p>Son of Richard Osborne, of Ashford, co. Kent. The story goes that
he was apprenticed to Sir William Hewet, clothworker, and that he
married his master's daughter, whom he had rescued from a watery grave
in the Thames at London Bridge. His son, Sir Edward Osborne, was
created a baronet by Charles I, and his grandson, Sir Thomas, made
Duke of Leeds in 1692 by King William III.</p></note> had been
elected to the mayoralty&mdash;a conspiracy, which had
long been on foot, for the assassination of Elizabeth
and the invasion of England by a French army was
discovered. Matters began to look serious, and it
behoved the queen to dismiss the Spanish ambassador<pb n="529" /><anchor id="Pg529" /><index index="toc" level1="PREPARATIONS FOR WAR." />
from England (Jan., 1584) and to see to her forces.
Lord Burghley drew up "a memoryall of dyvers
thynges nesessary to be thought of and to be put
in execution for this sommer for y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> strength of
y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> realme to serve for martiall defence ageynst ether
rebellion or invasion,"<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 157. The right of holding
musters in Southwark was again questioned; and the claim of the city
was upheld by Sir Francis Walsingham. For this he received the thanks
of the lord mayor by letter dated 15 Feb.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 159.</p></note> containing suggestions for
holding musters and training soldiers. The navy was
got ready for sea.</p>

<note place="margin">Muster of 4,000 men in Greenwich Park, 1584.</note>

<p>In April (1584) the City received orders to muster
4,000 men and to revive the military shows on the
eve of the Feasts of St. John the Baptist and St. Peter
the Apostle as accustomed to be held in the days of
Henry VIII. These displays had gradually fallen into
desuetude; it was now the queen's policy to renew
them.<note place="foot"><p>"A lettre from the quenes ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">t</hi>y for y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> mustringe of 4000 men,
and also for the shewes on the evens of St. John Baptist and St. Peter
thapostles."&mdash;Journal 21, fo. 421b.</p></note> The citizens showed themselves equal to the
emergency, and "mustered and skirmished" daily at
Mile End and St. George's Field, so that in little more
than a month they were in a fit state of discipline and
training to appear in Greenwich Park before the queen
herself, who thanked them graciously for their energy
and pains, and declared that she had no subjects more
ready to suppress disloyalty and to defend her person.<note place="foot"><p>Contin. of Holinshed, v, 599, 600.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Assassination of Prince of Orange, 10 July, 1584.</note>

<p>In July news arrived of the assassination of the
Prince of Orange (10 July). Englishmen well knew
that those who plotted against his life were plotting
also against the life of their queen, and with wonderful
unanimity&mdash;Catholics and Protestants alike&mdash;they<pb n="530" /><anchor id="Pg530" />
joined in a "Bond of Association" for the defence of
her majesty's person. The terms of the association
were afterwards embodied in a bill and submitted to
parliament, specially summoned for the purpose.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fo. 388b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Dutch envoys to Elizabeth, June, 1585.</note>

<p>Staggered by the sudden loss of their beloved
leader, the Netherlanders despatched envoys the
following year (1585) to England offering to acknowledge
Elizabeth as their sovereign. Upon their
arrival in London the envoys were lodged and
hospitably entertained&mdash;although not at the City's
expense&mdash;in Clothworkers' Hall,<note place="foot"><p>Stow's Annals (ed. 1592), pp. 1198-1201.</p></note> and on the 29th
June were received in audience by the queen at
Greenwich. After much hesitation, as was her wont,
she at last consented to take the Netherlands under
her protection and to despatch troops to their assistance,
but only on condition that the States gave
security for expenses to be incurred.<note place="foot"><p>Motley, "United Netherlands," i, pp. 318-324.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Recruits for service in the Low Countries, July, 1585.</note>

<p>On the 9th July the mayor, Sir Thomas Pullison,<note place="foot"><p>For particulars of his life see Remembrancia (Analytical Index),
p. 284, note.</p></note>
issued his precept to the aldermen for each to make
a survey in his ward of all such persons as were suitable
and willing for service in the Low Countries,
where it was intended they should have good
allowance.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fo. 448b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The fall of Antwerp and despatch of Leicester to the Low Countries, 1585.</note>

<p>Every effort was made to save Antwerp, but it
was too late. By chaffering and bargaining with the
envoys Elizabeth had lost her opportunity and
Antwerp fell (19 Aug.). She could be resolute at<pb n="531" /><anchor id="Pg531" /><index index="toc" level1="THE FALL OF ANTWERP." />
times, but it wanted much to rouse her into activity.
The news of Antwerp's fall administered to her the
necessary incitement to deal "roundly and resolutely"
with her new allies. Fresh forces were despatched
to Flanders under the Earl of Leicester, making in
all some 10,000 men that had already been sent
thither, nearly one-fourth of which had been furnished
by the city of London.<note place="foot"><p>"Thaccompte of the saide chamberlyn for the transportacioun and
necessary provision of <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">MMCCCCXX</hi> soldiers into the lowe countryes of
Flaunders."&mdash;Chamber Accounts, vol. ii, fos. 56-58b.</p></note> The queen grumbled at
having to send so many&mdash;"I have sent a fine heap
of folk thither, in all ... not under 10,000
soldiers of the English nation," said she to the
envoys in October<note place="foot"><p>Motley, "United Netherlands," i, 340.</p></note>&mdash;and she kept the earl so short
of money that he had to mortgage his estate.<note place="foot"><p>Chamber Accounts, ii, 134. The earl's honor of Denbigh, North
Wales, was mortgaged to certain citizens of London, and not being
redeemed, was afterwards purchased by the queen herself.&mdash;Repertory
22, fo. 287.</p></note> The
City did what it could and made him a present of
£500 in "newe angells," but the City itself was in
pecuniary difficulties and was compelled to borrow or
"take up" money to defend its title to its own
lands,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 21, fos. 308-311.</p></note> which had been in constant jeopardy ever
since the appointment of the royal commission to
search for "concealed lands" in 1567.<note place="foot"><p>For many years after the passing of the Act (1 Edw. VI, c. 14)
confiscating property devoted to "superstitious uses," the corporation
and the livery companies were the objects of suspicion of holding
"concealed lands," <hi rend="font-style: italic">i.e.</hi> lands held charged for superstitious uses, which
they had failed to divulge. The appointment of a royal commission
to search for such lands was submitted to the law officers of the city
for consideration, 9 Sept., 1567.&mdash;Repertory 16, fo. 276b. Vexatious
proceedings continued to be taken under the Act until the year 1623,
when a Statute was passed, entitled "An Act for the General Quiet of the
Subjects against all Pretences of Concealment whatsoever."&mdash;Stat. 21,
James I, c. ii.</p></note></p>

<pb n="532" /><anchor id="Pg532" />

<note place="margin">The city flooded with strangers from France and Flanders.</note>

<p>The direct effect of the fall of Antwerp upon
the city of London was to flood its streets more
than ever with strangers, and on the 30th October,
1585, the mayor was once more called upon by the
lords of the Privy Council to make a return of the
number of strangers within the city, and more
especially of the number of French and Flemish
strangers that had arrived "sithens the beginninge of
the presente trobles moved by the house of Guise
in Fraunce and the rendringe of the towne of
Andwerpe."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 1.</p></note> In April and May of the following
year (1586) the year of the disastrous battle at
Zutphen and of the death of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Chevalier sans peur
et sans reproche</hi>, Sir Philip Sidney&mdash;another call was
made in the city for volunteers for service in the
Low Countries,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 26, 29.</p></note> and the civic companies were
ordered to lay in a stock of gunpowder to be ready
"uppon eny ymminent occacioun."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 37b; Repertory 21, fo. 288b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Discovery of the Babington plot, Aug., 1586.</note>

<p>Whilst operations, more or less active, were
being carried on in the Netherlands against Spain, a
new Catholic conspiracy against the life of Elizabeth,
with Anthony Babington at its head, was discovered
by Walsingham. The delight of the citizens
at the queen's escape drew forth from her a letter
which she desired to be read before the Common
Council, and in which she testified her appreciation
of their loyalty. The letter was introduced to the
council by some prefatory remarks made by James
Dalton, a member of the court, in which he expatiated
upon the beauties of the reformed Church<pb n="533" /><anchor id="Pg533" /><index index="toc" level1="THE BABINGTON CONSPIRACY." />
as contrasted with the Roman religion.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fos. 52-53.  Both the queen's letter and Dalton's
speech are printed in Stow's Continuation of Holinshed, iv, 902-904.</p></note> The discovery
of the plot led to stringent measures being taken
against suspected persons in the city, and returns
were ordered to be made setting forth for each ward:
(1) the names of the ablest men for service, (2) the
names of those past service, (3) the names of all who
were suspected as to religion, and (4) the names of
all strangers born.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fos. 48, 57b, 58; Repertory 21, fo. 327.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Execution of Mary Stuart, 8 Feb., 1587.</note>

<p>The discovery had also another effect: it
brought the head of Mary Stuart to the block. A
commission of peers sitting at Fotheringhay found
that the conspiracy had been "with the privitie of
the said Marie pretending tytle to the crowne of the
realme of England," and it only remained for
Elizabeth to sign the warrant for her execution to
remove for ever a dangerous rival. This, however,
the queen long hesitated to do, and when at length
prevailed upon she caused public proclamation to be
made of the reasons which induced her to take the
extreme course.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, dated Richmond, 4 Dec., 1586.&mdash;Journal 22, fo. 67b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A threatened famine in the city, Nov., 1586</note>

<p>To add to the general gloom, England was
threatened before the close of the year (1586) with a
famine, caused partly by the inclemency of the
seasons and partly by a "corner" in wheat, which
some enterprising engrossers had managed to bring
about.<note place="foot"><p>Royal Proclamation against engrossers of corn, 2 Jan., 1587.&mdash;Journal
22, fo. 74.</p></note> In November the mayor caused the city
companies to lay in 6,000 or 7,000 quarters of wheat
and rye for the relief of those who had already<pb n="534" /><anchor id="Pg534" />
suffered from the extreme dearth, and to raise a sum
of £2,500 over and above such sums as they had
hitherto disbursed for the provision of corn and
grain,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 64.</p></note> and the Court of Aldermen (3 Jan., 1587)
agreed to erect a new garner at the Bridgehouse.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 21, fo. 370b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Philip's preparations for invasion, 1587.</note>

<p>After the execution of Mary Stuart, Philip of
Spain laid claim to the crown of England. For years
past he was known to have been preparing a fleet for
an invasion of the country. Preparations were now
almost complete, and in 1587 expectation was that
the fleet might be seen any day bearing down
upon the English coast. The inhabitants of villages
and towns on the south coast forsook their homes in
terror of the invasion and sought shelter inland.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 21, fo. 136b.</p></note>
The evil hour was put off by the prompt action of
Drake, who, with four ships of the royal navy and
twenty-four others supplied by the City and private
individuals,<note place="foot"><p>Motley, "United Netherlands," ii, 281.</p></note> appeared suddenly off the Spanish coast,
and running into Cadiz and Lisbon, destroyed tons
of shipping under the very nose of the Spanish lord
high admiral, and threw into the sea the vast military
stores that had been accumulated there. Having
thus accomplished the object for which he set sail&mdash;that
of "singeing the king of Spain's beard"&mdash;he
returned, and the sailing of the Armada was put off
for a year.</p>

<note place="margin">Preparations in England, 1587-1588.</note>

<p>Preparations were in the meanwhile pushed on
in the city to meet the attack whenever it should be
made. Ten thousand men were levied and equipped
in a short space of time.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fos. 144, 161b, 166-167b, 170b.</p></note> Any inhabitant of the city<pb n="535" /><anchor id="Pg535" /><index index="toc" level1="PREPARATIONS TO MEET THE ARMADA." />
assessed in the subsidy-book at £50 in goods, and
who, being under fifty years of age, was called upon
to serve, and refused, was forthwith committed to
Newgate.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 190.</p></note> If any fault was to be found with the
city's force it was the inefficiency of its officers,
whom the municipal authorities always claimed to
appoint. The Earl of Leicester, who was in command
of the camp which had been formed at Tilbury, held
but a poor opinion of Londoners as a fighting force.<note place="foot"><p>Only 1,000 men out of the force raised by the city went to
Tilbury, and the earl only consented to receive this small contingent
on condition they brought their own provisions with them, so scantily
was the camp supplied with victuals through the queen's parsimony.&mdash;Remembrancia
(Analytical Index), p. 244. Letter from Leicester to
Walsingham, 26 July.&mdash;Cal. State Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 513.</p></note>
"For your Londoners," wrote the earl to Walsingham,<note place="foot"><p>Leicester to Walsingham, 28 July, 1588.&mdash;State Papers Dom.,
vol. ccxiii, No. 55.</p></note>
I see their service will be little, except they have
their own captains, and having them, I look for
none at all by them when we shall meet the
enemy." He declares that he knows what burghers
be well enough, even though they be "as brave and
well trained" as the Londoners; they would be
useless without good leaders,<note place="foot"><p>William of Malmesbury bears similar testimony to the courage of
Londoners under good leadership: <hi rend="font-style: italic">Laudandi prorsus viri et quos
Mars ipse collata non sperneret hasta si ducem habuissent</hi>.&mdash;Gesta
Regum (Rolls Series, No. 90), i, 208.</p></note> and on this he had
always insisted. He warns Walsingham against yielding
to the wishes of "townsmen" at such a critical
juncture, for they would look for the like concession
at other times. The Londoners were not peculiar
in their desire to have their own officers, according
to the earl's own showing, for the letter continues:&mdash;"You
and my lords all know the imperfection<pb n="536" /><anchor id="Pg536" />
at this time, how few leaders you have, and the
gentlemen of the counties here are likewise very
loth to have any placed with them to command
under them, but well pleased to have some expert
man with them to give them advice." Two years
later a code of regulations for the "trayninge of
capytaynes" was forwarded by the government to
the city, and there put into execution.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 22, fo. 148b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City fits out sixteen ships and four pinnaces.</note>

<p>In addition to the land force the City agreed
(3 April, 1588) to furnish and fully equip for war
sixteen of the largest and best merchant ships that
could be found in the Thames, and four pinnaces to
attend on them.<note place="foot"><p>A list of "the London shippes" (including pinnaces), dated
19 July, 1588, is preserved among the State Papers (Domestic) at the
Public Record Office (vol. ccxii, No. 68), and is set out in the
Appendix to this work. Two other lists, dated 24 July, giving the
names of the ships (exclusive of pinnaces) are also preserved (State
Papers Dom., vol. ccxiii, Nos. 15, 16). Each of these lists give the
number of vessels supplied by the city against the Armada as sixteen
ships and four pinnaces, or as twenty ships (inclusive of pinnaces). It
is not clear what was the authority of Stow (Howes's Chron., p. 743)
for stating that the city, having been requested to furnish fifteen ships
of war and 5,000 men, asked for two days to deliberate, and then
furnished thirty ships and 10,000 men. At the same time there does
exist a list of "shipps set forth and payde upon y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> charge of y<hi rend="vertical-align: super">e</hi> city of
London, anno 1588" (that is to say, the ships furnished by the city
for that whole year), and that list contains the names of thirty ships,
with the number of men on board each vessel and the names of the
commanders.&mdash;State Papers Dom., vol. ccxxxii, fos. 16, 16b.</p></note> A committee was nominated to sit
at Clothworkers' Hall and take the necessary steps for
fitting out the vessels, the cost of which was to be
met by an assessment on citizen and stranger alike.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 173. The assessment was afterwards (19 April)
settled at three shillings in the pound.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 175.</p></note>
Nothing was said at the time about victualling the
fleet, but we learn from a later entry in the City's
Journal that they were victualled for three months.
On the 16th July the City agreed to supply victuals<pb n="537" /><anchor id="Pg537" /><index index="toc" level1="THE ADVENT OF THE ARMADA." />
for "those twentie shipps lately sett forth" for one
month longer, and on the 10th August the Common
Council again passed a similar resolution.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fos. 193, 200b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The fate of the Armada, July, 1588.</note>

<p>At last the blow fell. On Friday, the 19th (o.s.)
July, the Armada was sighted off the Lizard. A
strong wind from the south-west was blowing at the
time, and it was thought advisable to let the fleet
pass and to follow it up with the English vessels
then lying in Plymouth harbour. On the following
day the two fleets hove in sight of each other.
According to the report made to Walsingham by
Richard Tomson&mdash;a Londoner serving on board the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Margaret and John</hi>, one of the ships furnished by the
City&mdash;the Spanish fleet numbered at that time 136
sail, ninety of which were large vessels, whilst the
English fleet numbered no more than sixty-seven.<note place="foot"><p>Richard Tomson to Walsingham, 30 July, 1588.&mdash;Cal. State
Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 517.</p></note></p>

<p>Notwithstanding the great superiority of the
enemy's fleet in numbers and tonnage, the English
admiral, Lord Howard, opened fire the next morning,
but took care not to come to close quarters. "We
had some small fight with them that Sunday
afternoon," reported Hawkins to Walsingham.<note place="foot"><p>Hawkins to Walsingham, 31 July, 1588.&mdash;Cal. State Papers
Dom. (1581-1590), p. 517.</p></note>
The admiral had other reasons for preserving caution.
His ships were but ill-furnished with provisions and
with ammunition, and even thus early he had to beg
the Secretary of State to send him "for God's sake
some powder and shot."<note place="foot"><p>Howard to the same, 21 July.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, p. 507.</p></note> The same deficiency of
ammunition was experienced the whole time that<pb n="538" /><anchor id="Pg538" />
the two fleets were opposed to each other, and but
for this the enemy would not have got off so cheaply
as it did. Scarcely a day passed without some
cannonading taking place, but never a general engagement.
The English trusted to their superior
seamanship and to the greater activity of their own
light vessels compared with the heavier and more
unwieldly Spanish galleons. Again and again they
poured broadside after broadside into the enemy, but
always making good their retreat before the Spanish
vessels could turn in pursuit. On Tuesday (23 July),
wrote Hawkins, they had "a sharp and long fight" off
Portland, on Thursday "a hot fraye." And thus the
Armada made its way up channel, pestered with the
swarm of English vessels that would never leave it at
peace. On the Saturday following (27 July) it finally
dropped anchor in Calais roads, with the intention of
awaiting there the arrival of Alexander Farnese with
his promised aid before making a direct descent upon
the English coast. Farnese did not arrive for the
reason that he was blockaded by the Dutch fleet;
but the English received an accession of strength by
the arrival of Lord Henry Seymour with a squadron
of sixteen ships, which hitherto had been lying off
Folkestone.<note place="foot"><p>Sir William Wynter to Walsingham, 1 Aug., 1588.&mdash;Cal. State
Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 521.</p></note></p>

<p>At this juncture the lord mayor (Sir George
Bond), having received information of the critical
state of affairs and that a general engagement was
imminent, issued his precept to the aldermen to
summon the pastors and ministers of each ward, and
bid them call their parishioners to church by toll of<pb n="539" /><anchor id="Pg539" /><index index="toc" level1="RICHARD TOMSON AND HIS EXPLOIT." />
bell or otherwise, both in the morning and afternoon
of this eventful Saturday, in order that humble and
hearty prayers might be offered to Almighty God
"by preaching and otherwise," as the necessity of the
times required.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 196b.</p></note> Three days before (24 July) he had
given orders for a strict watch and ward to be kept in
the city, and for a goodly supply of leather buckets
in case of fire.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 196.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Richard Tomson and the London ship <hi rend="font-style: italic">Margaret and John</hi>.</note>

<p>After more than one consultation together, the
English commanders determined to resort to stratagem.
They sent for a number of useless hulks from Dover,
and having filled them with every kind of combustible,
sent them all aflame on Sunday night into the thick
of the enemy. The result was a panic; cables were
cut and frantic attempts made to escape what seemed
imminent and wholesale destruction. The ships fell
foul of each other; some were wrecked and others
burnt. When Monday morning dawned only eighty-six
vessels out of 124 that had anchored off Calais
thirty-six hours before could be found, and these for
the most part were seen driving towards the coast of
Flanders. The English fleet at once prepared to
follow in pursuit, but attention was for a time drawn
off to the action of the flagship of the squadron
of galeasses, a huge vessel which had become disabled
by loss of rudder, and the crew of which
were endeavouring by the aid of oars to bring
into Calais harbour. The Lord Admiral Howard at
once bore down upon her in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ark</hi>, but the water
proved too shallow. The London ship <hi rend="font-style: italic">Margaret
and John</hi> followed suit and, although of less tonnage
than the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Ark</hi>, got aground. Richard Tomson sent<pb n="540" /><anchor id="Pg540" />
home a graphic account of the exploit that followed.<note place="foot"><p>Tomson to Walsingham, 30 July, 1588.&mdash;State Papers Dom.,
vol. ccxiii, No. 67.</p></note>
Both ships sent out long boats to capture the rich prize
as she lay stuck fast upon the harbour bar. Tomson
himself formed one of the little band of volunteers. The
boats were soon alongside the galeass, its huge sides
towering high above them. There then ensued "a
pretty skirmish for half-an-hour," wrote Tomson, "but
they seemed safely ensconced in their ships, while we
in our open pinnaces and far under them had nothing
to shroud and cover us." Fortune at last favoured the
attackers. The Spanish commander fell dead on his
deck with a bullet through his head. A panic seized
the sailors, most of whom jumped overboard and
tried by swimming and wading to reach the shore.
Some succeeded, but many were drowned; whilst
those who remained on board signified their readiness
to capitulate by hoisting a couple of "handkerchers"
on rapiers. The English lost no time in clambering
up the sides of the monster, and at once commenced
plundering the vessel and releasing the galley slaves.
They were only waiting for the tide to take their
prize in tow and carry her off when they were warned
by the governor of Calais against making any such
attempt. They were free to plunder the vessel if
they liked, but make prize of the vessel itself they
must not, and this order the governor showed
himself ready and able to enforce by opening fire
from the fort. Tomson and his fellow volunteers
were heartily disgusted at having after all to surrender
their prize, "the verye glory and staye of the Spanish
armye, a thing of very great value and strength."</p>

<pb n="541" /><anchor id="Pg541" />

<note place="margin">The naval engagement off Gravelines 29 July, 1588.</note>

<p>This exploit being ended and the long boats
having returned to their respective ships, the lord
admiral started in pursuit of the Spaniards. Seeing
them coming up the Spanish commander immediately
prepared for action. An engagement&mdash;described by
Hawkins as "a long and great fight"&mdash;took place off
Gravelines and lasted six hours. The English pursued
the same tactics as before, and with like success.
Without losing a single ship of their own they succeeded
in riddling the best Spanish ships through and
through, and at last the Armada was forced to bear
away towards the open sea. The English followed
and made a pretence of keeping up the attack, but by
this time nearly all their ammunition as well as food
had given out.</p>

<note place="margin">The Armada driven northward.</note>

<p>From Tuesday (30 July) until the following
Friday (2 Aug.) the pursuit was, nevertheless, maintained
by Howard, Drake and Frobisher. On Sunday
(4 Aug.) the strong south-wester which had prevailed
rose to a gale, and the English fleet made its way
home with difficulty. It was otherwise with the
Armada. Crippled and forlorn, without pilots and
without competent commander, the great fleet was
driven northward past the Hebrides and eventually
returned home in a decimated condition by the west
coast of Ireland.</p>

<note place="margin">Preparations in the city for receiving sick and wounded, 29 July.</note>

<p>In the meantime the civic authorities took order
for receiving the sick and wounded and administering
to their comfort. Two aldermen&mdash;Sir Thomas Pullison
and Sir Wolstan Dixie&mdash;were deputed (29 July) by
their brethren to ride abroad among the innholders,
brewers, bakers and butchers of the city to see that
they did not enhance the price of provisions and that<pb n="542" /><anchor id="Pg542" />
they well entertained all soldiers who arrived in the
city.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 21, fo. 578.</p></note> The City agreed, moreover, to re-victual the
ships it had furnished and to provide them with
munition and other requisites. A fresh tax was
imposed for the purpose of "marine and land
affairs."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 200b; Cal. State Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 510.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Reports as to the fate of the Armada, July-Aug., 1588.</note>

<p>It was a long time before any certain news
arrived in the city of the ultimate fate of the Armada.
There had been rumours abroad that the English fleet
had been victorious&mdash;with so many Londoners serving
in the fleet, it would have been strange indeed if their
friends at home had been kept in absolute ignorance
of what was taking place in the channel&mdash;and bonfires
had been lighted, but these rumours were often incorrect
and sometimes lead to mischief. The mayor
therefore issued his precept to the aldermen on the
30th July&mdash;the day after the engagement off Gravelines&mdash;bidding
them see that the inhabitants of their
several wards refrained from crediting any news that
might be reported of the vessels at sea but what they
received from the mayor himself. The precaution
was necessary "for the avoyding of some dislike that
may come thereof."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 197.</p></note> On the 1st August, so critical
were the times, the mayor issued a precept by the
queen's orders forbidding householders to quit the
city, that they might the better be ready for the
queen's service if required.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 199b.</p></note> On the 4th the citizens
were informed that if they had any friend or servant
detained as prisoner in the Spanish dominion, or
bound to the galleys, whom they wished to set free,<pb n="543" /><anchor id="Pg543" /><index index="toc" level1="THANKSGIVING SERVICE AT ST. PAUL'S." />
they might have Spanish prisoners allotted to them
to assist towards ransom.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 200.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The queen attends a public thanksgiving service at St. Paul's, 24 Nov., 1588.</note>

<p>The first public notification of the complete destruction
of the Armada was made in a thanksgiving
sermon preached by the Dean of St. Paul's on Tuesday,
the 20th August, at Paul's Cross, in the presence
of the mayor and aldermen and the livery companies
in their best gowns.<note place="foot"><p>Nichols' "Progresses of Q. Elizabeth," ii, 537.</p></note> In November the queen resolved
to attend a public thanksgiving service at St. Paul's in
person, Monday, the 18th, being the day that was
originally fixed. Great preparations were made for
the occasion. The livery companies were ordered to
take up their appointed stations at eight o'clock in the
morning and to follow in the train of the royal
procession until the "preaching place" was reached.
Places were to be kept by a detachment of the
"yeomanry" of each company sent on at six o'clock
for that purpose. The "governors of the hospital"
of each company were also to attend, staff in hand,
and repair to the "skaffold" for them appointed.
After dinner the companies were to return immediately
to their stations and to wait there until her
majesty returned to Somerset House.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fos. 233, 235.</p></note> The day
was afterwards changed from Monday, the 18th, to
Sunday, the 24th, when the queen came in great
state to St. Paul's. After prayers she took her
seat in a closet built out of the north wall of the
church and facing Paul's Cross, where she heard a
sermon preached by the Bishop of Salisbury. That
being over she was entertained at dinner in the<pb n="544" /><anchor id="Pg544" />
bishop's palace, and afterwards returned to Somerset
House.<note place="foot"><p>Nichols' "Progresses of Q. Elizabeth," ii, 538, 539.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Monuments in city churches to Frobisher, Hawkins and Martin Bond.</note>

<p>Whilst the City is justly proud of its own share
in the defence of the kingdom at this great crisis
in the nation's history, it has not neglected to give
honour where honour was most due. Of the great
naval commanders the "sea dogs" of that age&mdash;the
faces of at least two of them were familiar to the
citizens. Both Frobisher and Hawkins owned property
in the city, and in all probability resided there,
like their fellow seaman and explorer, Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, who was living in Red Cross Street, in
the parish of St. Giles, Cripplegate, in 1583, the
year that he met his death at sea.<note place="foot"><p>On the 7th Feb., 1583, previously to setting out on his last ill-fated
expedition, Gilbert addressed a letter to Walsingham from "his
house in Redcross Street."&mdash;Cal. State Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 95.</p></note> The same parish
claims Frobisher, whose remains (excepting his entrails,
which were interred at Plymouth, where he
died) lie buried in St. Giles's Church, and to whom a
mural monument was erected by the vestry in 1888,
just three centuries after the defeat of the Armada, to
which he had contributed so much. If Hawkins himself
did not reside in the city, his widow had a mansion
house in Mincing Lane.<note place="foot"><p>See the will of Dame Margaret Hawkins, dated 23 April, 1619.&mdash;Cal.
of Wills, Court of Hust., London, ii, 745. The will contains
many bequests of articles which savour of Spanish loot.</p></note> He, too, had probably
lived there, for although he died and was buried at
sea, a monument was erected to his memory and that
of Katherine, his first wife, in the church of St.
Dunstan-in-the-East.<note place="foot"><p>Strype, Stow's "Survey" (1720), bk. ii, p. 44.</p></note> There is one other&mdash;a citizen
of London and son of an alderman&mdash;whose name has<pb n="545" /><anchor id="Pg545" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CAMP AT TILBURY." />
been handed down as having taken an active part in
the defence of the kingdom at this time, not at sea,
but on land. A monument in the recently restored
church of St. Helen, Bishopsgate, tells us that Martin
Bond, son of Alderman William Bond, "was captaine
in ye yeare 1588 at ye campe at Tilbury, and after
remained chief captaine of ye trained bands of this
citty until his death." The monument represents
him as sitting in a tent guarded by two sentinels, with
a page holding a horse.</p>

<note place="margin">Disorganized state of the camp at Tilbury.</note>

<p>It was well that the Spaniards suffered defeat at
sea, for had they been able to effect a landing they
would have made short work with the half-trained
and dissatisfied soldiers in the camp at Tilbury, and
London would have been at their mercy. Even the
presence of Elizabeth herself, riding on horseback
through the camp, as she did on the 8th August, was
but poor compensation to the soldiers for the want of
victuals and wages. Many sold their armour and
weapons to pay themselves as soon as the camp broke
up. Citizens of London were warned by royal proclamation
(20 Aug.)<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 202b.</p></note> against purchasing armour and
weapons offered by soldiers, who were declared to
"have most falsly and slanderously given out that
they weare compelled to make sale of them for
that they receaved noe pay, which is most untruely
reported." Any armour or weapons bought before
publication of the proclamation was to be delivered
up to the mayor with particulars as to the way the
purchase had been effected and compensation would
be allowed.</p>

<pb n="546" /><anchor id="Pg546" />

<note place="margin">City loans of £30,000 and £20,000, Sept.-Dec., 1588.</note>

<p>Notwithstanding the extreme parsimony with
which Elizabeth had fitted out both army and navy,
the cost of preparations to meet the attack of Spain
had been great, and she was obliged to borrow money.
In September (1588) the City advanced her the sum
of £30,000, receiving her bond for repayment in the
following March; and in the following December she
borrowed a further sum of £20,000 to be repaid by
the following April. Both sums were raised among
the livery companies.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 210; Repertory 21, fos. 590b, 593; Repertory 22,
fos. 15, 26b, 27; Cal. State Papers Dom. (1581-1590), p. 471.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Expedition to Spain under Norris and Drake, April-July, 1589.</note>

<p>In March of the following year (1589) parliament
granted a liberal supply, but the grant was accompanied
by a request that Elizabeth would no longer
await the assaults of Spain, but carry the war into the
enemy's country. This the queen declared her inability
to undertake on the score of poverty. She
promised, however, to give what assistance she could
to any of her subjects who relished such enterprise.
Norris and Drake were at hand, ready and willing
to undertake the work on these terms. Already
(in January) the City had been called upon to furnish
them with 400 strong and able men.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 252; Repertory 22, fo. 16b.</p></note> At the end of
March 1,000 more were required, and each alderman
was instructed to search in his ward for all able and
masterless men and all other persons fit for service
that were householders and not charged with families,
and to bring them to the Leadenhall.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fos. 227b, 278.</p></note> With these
and other forces the expedition set sail, but beyond
storming Vigo and committing some damage at<pb n="547" /><anchor id="Pg547" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND DISBANDED SOLDIERS." />
Corunna, it accomplished nothing and returned in
July.</p>

<note place="margin">Disbanded soldiers and sailors in the city.</note>

<p>Again the city was threatened with danger and
disease from the presence of disbanded soldiers and
sailors, who were apt to carry their freebooting habits
wherever they went, more especially when starvation
stared them in the face. Sir Martin Calthorp did what
he could to relieve them, paying out of his own pocket
no less a sum than £100. His conduct was applauded
by the lords of the council, who authorised him to
raise a further sum towards assisting the soldiers to
their homes in the country by allowing them a half-penny
a mile.<note place="foot"><p>Burghley and others to the mayor, 26 July, 1589.&mdash;Journal 22,
fo. 312.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Soldiers ordered to return to their own homes.</note>

<p>A royal proclamation was subsequently (20 Aug.)
issued promising payment of any money due to
mariners who would make a written application to the
Admiralty. Soldiers were to return to the country
where they had been pressed and apply to the justices
or other officers who pressed them, and who would
make a certificate to the lieutenant of the county,
when the soldiers would receive "reasonable contentment."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 316b.</p></note>
This, however, failed entirely to remedy the
evil.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 345b; Journal 23, fo. 79.</p></note> Four days before this proclamation precept had
been issued to the aldermen for a good and substantial
double watch to be kept throughout the night of the
16th August until noon of the next day. There had
been a report abroad of a large meeting of soldiers
and sailors to take place as early as five o'clock on the
morning of the 17th in the neighbourhood of Tower
Hill.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 314.</p></note></p>

<pb n="548" /><anchor id="Pg548" />

<note place="margin">Elizabeth and Henry IV of France, 1589-1591.</note>

<p>The revolution which followed the assassination
of the French king by Jaques Clements about this
time (Aug., 1589) brought fresh anxiety to Elizabeth,
who felt bound to support the Protestant Henry of
Navarre with all the means at her command, as an
indirect way of carrying on the war against Spain.
Four thousand men were to be despatched for his
assistance, 1,000 of whom the City was called upon
to supply. As they were to be picked men the lords
of the council ordered double the number, or 2,000 men,
to be got ready, in order that expert officers might
review them and select the number required.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 22, fo. 321b.</p></note>
The demand was enforced by a letter from the
queen herself, in which she drew attention to the
necessity of assisting one whose preservation was of
so much importance to England.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 326.</p></note> The city's gates
were at once closed by the mayor's orders to prevent
the exodus of "lusty, strong, able and young men" to
avoid service.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 321.</p></note> Although Henry IV was materially
assisted by the arrival of English troops, their operations
were chiefly confined to Normandy.</p>

<note place="margin">The City and the Earl of Essex, 1591.</note>

<p>A further contingent of 400 men was shortly
afterwards (22 June) demanded by the queen, 300
of which were to be got ready at once. More care
than usual was to be bestowed on their selection, as
they were to be employed under the Earl of Essex,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fos. 35, 38.</p></note>
with whom the City happened at this time to be out
of favour. What was the precise cause of the City's
disgrace does not appear; we only know that the
civic authorities were anxious to recover the good will
of one so near the person of the sovereign, and to<pb n="549" /><anchor id="Pg549" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY AND THE EARL OF ESSEX." />
this end made him a "small present," thanking him
for his past services, for the general defence of the
realm, and of all Christian estates professing the
Gospel and true religion of Almighty God, and
assuring him that they were not so much presenting
him with money, in sending him a gratuity, as with
"the hart of the citie." They begged that if some
private offence had been given to his lordship he
would "wrappe it up" in this public testimony of
their hearty good wills.<note place="foot"><p>July 24, 1591.&mdash;Remembrancia. i, 599 (Analytical Index, p. 408).</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City agrees to fit out six ships and a pinnace, 16 June, 1591.</note>

<p>In the meantime the Common Council had, at
the queen's request, agreed (16 June) to fit out six
ships of war and one pinnace at a cost of £7,400, to
be levied on the companies. This sum was afterwards
raised to £8,000.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fos. 31, 43b, 48b; Repertory 22, fo. 284b.</p></note> Towards the close of the
year (9 Nov.) the lord mayor and sheriffs were called
upon to levy 200 able men to be "pioners." They
were to be chosen out of the city of London and the
county of Middlesex, and to be despatched to Dieppe
for service under the Earl of Essex "a service
vearie necessarie and we hope not of any long
continuaunce,"<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fos. 68, 68b; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cf.</hi> Cal. State Papers Dom. (1591-1594),
p. 48, where the date of the letter is given as "May."</p></note> wrote the queen. In addition to
men, the queen wanted money; and the Common
Council agreed (18 Sept.) to lend her £20,000 for
three months, afterwards renewed for six months.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fos. 325b, 383b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Search to be made for Spanish emissaries in disguise.</note>

<p>In the meantime Spanish emissaries, disguised as
soldiers, mariners, merchants, gentlemen with comely
apparel, and even as "gallantes," decked out in<pb n="550" /><anchor id="Pg550" />
colours and feathers, had been doing the work of
Philip silently but surely. Some had resorted to the
Universities; some to the Inns of Court; whilst others
had insinuated themselves into private families; but
wherever they took up their abode, and in whatsoever
capacity, their one aim and object had been
to seduce the queen's subjects from their allegiance.
So successful had been their efforts that Philip
meditated another attack on England in 1592. At
length commissioners were appointed in all parts
of the country to search for these "venemous vipers."
Householders were at the same time directed to
enquire into the antecedents of those who lodged
with them, and to mark if they attended Divine
Service or not. A register or calendar of particulars
respecting them was to be kept, to be shown on
demand.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fos. 45-46b.</p></note> Here is a description of one whose arrest
was desired in 1596:&mdash;"A yonge man of meane and
slender stature aged about xxvj<hi rend="vertical-align: super">tie</hi> w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> a high collored
face, red nose, a warte over his left eye, havinge
two greate teeth before standinge out very apparant,
he nameth himselffe Edward Harrison borne in
Westmerland, apparelled in a crane collored fustian
dublet, rounde hose, after the frenche facion, an
olde paire of yollowe knit neather stockes, he
escaped w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi>out either cloake, girdle, garters or
shoes."<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fo. 86.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Privateering expeditions against Spain, 1591-1592.</note>

<p>Whilst all exportation of munitions of war, corn
and other victual into Spain or Portugal was strictly
forbidden,<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, dated 16 Sept., 1591.&mdash;Journal 23, fo. 47.</p></note> the merchants of London, as well as
noblemen and wealthy country gentlemen, were<pb n="551" /><anchor id="Pg551" /><index index="toc" level1="PRIVATEERING AGAINST SPAIN." />
encouraged to deal blows at the enemy by fitting out
privateers for scouring the Spanish Main.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 73.</p></note> Many a
rich prize was thus brought home, the spoil being
divided by specially appointed commissioners,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 71.</p></note> whose
duty it was, among other things, to see that the
Crown was not defrauded of the custom due upon the
goods thus captured."<note place="foot"><p>Proclamations, dated 8 Jan. and 26 Sept., 1592.&mdash;Journal 23,
fos. 78b, 136.</p></note> The "fleet of the city of
London" was very successful in this kind of work,
and a sum of £6,000 fell to its lot as prize-money in
1591. This sum was ventured again in an expedition
undertaken by Raleigh in the following year,<note place="foot"><p>The queen to the lord mayor, 6 Jan., 1592.&mdash;Cal. State Papers Dom.
(1591-1594), p. 168. The same to the same, 25 Jan.&mdash;Journal 23, fo. 87.</p></note> with
the result that the City netted no less a sum than
£12,000, its share of the spoil of a rich "carraque"
that Raleigh had captured.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fos. 157, 167, 174, 224b; Repertory 23, fo. 29.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Proposal to build a pest-house for the city, 1592.</note>

<p>This lucky windfall befell the citizens at a time
when money was sorely needed for building a pest-house
or hospital for sufferers from the plague, which
again visited the city at the close of 1592.<note place="foot"><p>It was in 1592 that bills of mortality, kept by the parish clerks,
were for the first time published.</p></note> The cost
of such a building was estimated at £6,000. Various
schemes were proposed for raising the money. At
one time (July, 1593) it was resolved that the several
livery companies which had taken shares in Raleigh's
venture should contribute twelvepence in the pound
of their clear gain towards the object.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 204b.</p></note> Later on
(May, 1594) the companies were called upon to
contribute one-third of their clear gain. Even this<pb n="552" /><anchor id="Pg552" />
proved insufficient, and had to be supplemented by a
"benevolence" in each ward.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 266.</p></note> Another year went
by, and the hospital was still unfinished.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 400, 402.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The hysterical Anne Burnell.</note>

<p>The strain which the continuation of the war
and the threatened renewal of a Spanish invasion
imposed upon the inhabitants of London at large was
a great one, and appears to have affected the mind of
a weak and hysterical woman, Anne Burnell. She
gave out that she was a daughter of the king of Spain,
and that the arms of England and Spain were to be
seen, like <hi rend="font-style: italic">stigmata</hi>, upon her back, as was vouched
for by her servant Alice Digges. After medical examination,
which proved her statement to be "false
and proceedinge of some lewde and imposterouse
pretence," she and her maid were ordered to be
whipt,&mdash;"ther backes only beeinge layd bare,"&mdash;at
the cart's tail through the city on a market day,
"with a note in writinge uppon the hinder part of
there heades shewinge the cawse of there saide
punishmente."<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 153.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Six ships, two pinnaces and 350 men provided by the City against Spain, July, 1594.</note>

<p>On the 16th July, 1594, the queen informed the
citizens by letter of the king of Spain having made
preparations to get possession of the harbour of
Brest, and her determination to oppose him. She
had given orders for certain companies of soldiers to
be levied in divers counties, and she called upon the
citizens to furnish her with a contingent of 450
men. They were to be well trained and supplied
with armour and weapons; their "coate and conduct
monye" would be found for them.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 290b. The number was afterwards reduced to 350
men.&mdash;<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 296b; Remembrancia, ii, 3, 27, 30.</p></note> The Court of<pb n="553" /><anchor id="Pg553" /><index index="toc" level1="ALDERMAN SIR JOHN SPENCER." />
Common Council met on the following day and
agreed to provide the number of soldiers required.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 290.</p></note>
It had already (15 July) agreed to furnish six ships
and two pinnaces for her majesty's service,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 289.</p></note> which
William Garraway and other owners of ships contracted
to find for the sum of £5,000.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 293. The names, tonnage and crews of the ships
are thus given (Remembrancia, ii, 26):&mdash;The Assention, 400 tons, 100
mariners; The Consent, 350 tons, 100 mariners; The Susan Bonadventure,
300 tons, 70 mariners; The Cherubim, 300 tons, 70 mariners;
The Minion, 180 tons, 50 mariners; and The Primrose, 180 tons,
50 mariners. Only one pinnace is mentioned, of 50 tons, with
20 mariners.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Sir John Spencer and his daughter.</note>

<p>On Michaelmas-day (1594) John Spencer&mdash;"Rich
Spencer" as he was called, from his extraordinary
wealth&mdash;was elected mayor for the ensuing
year.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 23, fo. 323b.</p></note> His daughter, much against her father's will,
married Lord Compton. To thwart the matrimonial
designs of a nobleman was in those days a perilous
task, and Alderman Spencer was committed to the
Fleet "for a contempt" in endeavouring to conceal
his daughter. "Our Sir John Spencer, of London"&mdash;writes
John Chamberlain<note place="foot"><p>Chamberlain's Letters, <hi rend="font-style: italic">temp.</hi>, Eliz. (Camd. Soc., No. 79), p. 50.
The writer was a son of Richard Chamberlain, a city alderman.</p></note> to Dudley Carleton
(15 March, 1599)&mdash;"was the last weeke committed
to the Fleet for a contempt and hiding away his
daughter, who, they say, is contracted to the Lord
Compton; but now he is out again, and by all
meanes seekes to hinder the match, alledging a
precontract to Sir Arthur Henningham's sonne.
But upon his beating and misusing her she was
sequestred to one Barkers, a proctor, and from
thence to Sir Henry Billingsleyes,<note place="foot"><p>Alderman of Tower Ward; Sheriff 1584-5; Mayor 1597.</p></note> where she yet<pb n="554" /><anchor id="Pg554" />
remaines till the matter be tried. If the obstinate
and self-willed fellow shold persist in his doggednes
(as he protests he will) and geve her nothing, the
poore lord shold have a warme catch."</p>

<p>A few weeks after Spencer's confinement in the
Fleet we find him at variance with his brother aldermen
for digging a pit on his estate near "Canbury,"
or Canonbury, and thereby drawing off water which
should have gone to supply the poor of St. Bartholomew's
Hospital to his own mansion. A request was
sent to him by the mayor and Court of Aldermen
to cease the conveyance of water until further
order had been taken therein.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 24, fo. 410b.</p></note> Two years later
his "doggednes" once more got him into trouble,
and he was committed to Wood Street Compter
for refusing to pay certain small sums of money due
from him towards furnishing soldiers and armour.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 25, fo. 216b.</p></note>
He died the 30th March, 1609, leaving behind him
£80,000.</p>

<p>His daughter, who inherited her father's money,
was possessed also of some of her father's spirit, and
Lord Compton appears to have got "a warme catch"
indeed to judge from a letter she addressed to him
soon after her father's death. After reminding her
"sweete life" of the care she had ever taken of his
estate and of her excellent behaviour, she begs him
to allow her £1,600 per annum, to be paid quarterly,
besides £600 a year for charitable works. She will
have three horses for her own saddle "that none
shall dare to lend or borrow; none lend but I, none
borrow but you." She will have so many gentlemen<pb n="555" /><anchor id="Pg555" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CAPTURE OF CADIZ." />
and so many gentlewomen to wait upon her at home,
whilst riding, hunting, hawking or travelling. When
on the road she will have laundresses "sent away
with the carriages to see all safe," and chambermaids
sent before with the grooms that the chambers may
be ready, sweet and clean. Seeing that her requests
are so reasonable she expects her husband to find her
children in apparel and schooling, and all her servants
in wages. She concludes by declaring her will to
have her houses handsomely furnished, not omitting
"silver warming pans," warns her husband against
lending money to the lord chamberlain, and prays
him to increase her allowance and double her attendance
on his becoming an earl.<note place="foot"><p>The letter is printed <hi rend="font-style: italic">in extenso</hi> in Chambers' "Book of Days,"
i, 464, and in Goodman's "Court of James I," ii, 127.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The capture of Cadiz, July, 1596.</note>

<p>Spencer was succeeded in the mayoralty by
Sir Stephen Slaney, and the latter's year of office
proved a busy one. Spain was meditating another
descent on England "with a greate navy of shippes
by sea and huge powers of men by lande," and the
City was expected to furnish sixteen ships and 10,000
men for land service. The naval demand was
extravagant, and after some remonstrance was reduced
to one for twelve ships and two pinnaces,
with a complement of 1,200 men.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 79b, 81, 82, 82b.</p></note> The City made
an attempt to get a reduction made also in the land
force, but with what success is not clear. This was
in December, 1595. The money was found by
imposing a tax of 2<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> 8<hi rend="font-style: italic">d.</hi> in the pound for goods
and 4<hi rend="font-style: italic">s.</hi> in the pound for lands on every inhabitant
of the city,<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 85b.</p></note> and by advances made by the livery<pb n="556" /><anchor id="Pg556" />
companies.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 105, 144.</p></note> On the 8th January (1596) the queen
addressed a very gracious letter of thanks to the
City for the promptitude displayed in furnishing
the ships.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fo. 84b.</p></note> Instead of waiting for Spain to attack,
Elizabeth carried the war into the enemy's country,
and Cadiz was captured six months later by Essex
and Howard. This exploit, in which the city of
London took its share, has been described<note place="foot"><p>Macaulay's "Essay on Lord Bacon."</p></note> as the
most brilliant that had ever been achieved by English
arms between Agincourt and Blenheim, and it was
celebrated in London with bonfires and general
rejoicing.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fo. 145.</p></note> As soon as the Common Council heard of
the arrival of the fleet from its successful voyage it
despatched commissioners to see after the City's
share of prize money.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 146b, 149.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Calais falls into the hands of Spain, April, 1596.</note>

<p>In the meantime (April, 1596) the queen's
tortuous and parsimonious policy had led to Calais
falling into the hands of Spain. She had called upon
the Londoners to furnish 1,000 soldiers to assist in
raising the siege, but it is a question whether they
ever got beyond Dover.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 110-111, 129b.; Repertory 23, fo. 594b.</p></note> Roused for the time to
a more energetic line of action, she determined to
prevent, if possible, the sister town of Boulogne
falling into the hands of Spain, and she called upon
the city of London to supply 405 men towards the
force to be despatched in the autumn for its defence.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 124, 154b, 157b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Reinforcements for the Netherlands, July, 1596.</note>

<p>The necessity of recruiting the garrison of the
cautionary town of Flushing, from which troops had<pb n="557" /><anchor id="Pg557" /><index index="toc" level1="THE CITY REFUSES FURTHER SUPPLIES." />
recently been withdrawn for service on the high seas,
compelled the queen to apply again to the City (July,
1596) for a contingent of 200 men.<note place="foot"><p>The queen to the mayor, 25 July; the lords of the council to the
same, 26 July.&mdash;Journal 24, fo. 142.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A demand for ten ships to be furnished by the City, Dec., 1596.</note>

<p>This constant drain on the resources of the city
at length called forth a remonstrance. The city was
being threatened with famine at the close of the year
(1596), when another demand arrived for ten ships to
be fitted out for the public service. The matter was
referred to a committee, and a reply was drawn up,
which was practically a refusal to obey the commands
of the council.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 173, 175.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The City's reply.</note>

<p>It set forth the utter inability of the citizens,
however willing they might be, to supply more ships.
They had already expended on sea service alone,
and irrespective of their disbursements in 1588, no less
a sum than 100,000 marks within the last few years;
so that the lords of the council would see that the
citizens had not been wanting in good will and affection
towards] that service. The same good will still remained,
but there was lacking the like ability, owing
partly to former charges by sea and land, but more
especially to the great scarcity of victual which had
continued in the city for the past three years, and had
compelled many who had formerly been well off to
reduce their expenditure, whilst others had been
obliged to relinquish their trades and break up their
households. As a proof of the poverty existing in the
city their lordships were reminded that when wheat
was offered at a very moderate rate many were too
poor to purchase any. The wealthier sort would<pb n="558" /><anchor id="Pg558" />
therefore have to be called upon to subscribe towards
the maintenance of the poorer class, and so be rendered
less able to contribute to other demands. The
letter proceeded to draw their lordships' attention to
what after all was the reason which weighed most
with the citizens for refusing to contribute any more
to the naval service. "Besides theis defectes" wrote
the mayor and corporation "we may not conceale the
great discontentment and utter discouragement of
the common people w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi>in this citie touchinge their
adventure in the late viage to the towne at <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cales</hi>
[Cadiz] w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">ch</hi> albeit it was perfourmed w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">th</hi> soe great
honor and happy successe as that the enemye was
greatly weakned, the army enritched and such store
of treasure and other comodities (besides that w<hi rend="vertical-align: super">ch</hi>
was thear embeazelled) brought safe home as was
sufficient to defraye the charges of the whole voyage,
yet forasmuch as neither their principall nor any
parte thereof was restored unto them contrarie to
the meaninge of the contract set downe in writinge
under the signatures of two noble persons in her
highnes name, they are made hereby utterly unfitt
and indisposed for the like service to be done hereafter."<note place="foot"><p>The same dissatisfaction at the result of the Cadiz expedition so far
as it affected the citizens of London was displayed in a previous letter
from the mayor to the lords of the Privy Council (3 Nov.) in answer to
a demand for 3,000 men and three ships to ride at Tilbury Hope and
give notice of the approach of the Spanish fleet.&mdash;Remembrancia
(Analytical Index), pp. 243, 244.</p></note>
The Cadiz adventure&mdash;they went on to
say&mdash;had cost the City £1,900, a great part of which
sum was still not collected, whilst the City's Chamber
was already in debt to the extent of £14,000 and
utterly unable to afford relief. The writers, in conclusion,
expressed themselves ready to contribute<pb n="559" /><anchor id="Pg559" /><index index="toc" level1="THE TYRONE REBELLION." />
towards the defence of the whole realm in like proportion
as others of her majesty's subjects, and with
this arrangement they felt sure her majesty would be
well content.</p>

<p>What was the effect of this reply does not
appear; but in one respect the queen was more than
a match for the citizens. They had pleaded scarcity
of provisions and poverty as an excuse for not
carrying out her recent orders. Very good; let the
livery companies, whose duty it was to find men
and money when required, practise a little self-restraint
in the coming summer (1597). Let them,
she said, forbear giving feasts in their halls and
elsewhere, and bestow half the money thus saved
on the poor; and the order of the Court of Aldermen
went forth accordingly.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 24, fo. 60b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Affairs in Ireland, 1594-1599.</note>

<p>For some years past it had always been feared
lest Spain should again endeavour to strike at England
through Ireland. A rising in Ulster under Hugh
O'Neill, known in England as the Earl of Tyrone, in
1594 was followed by an appeal to Spain for help in
1595. Philip acceded to the request and another
Armada was got ready; but the fleet had scarcely put
to sea before it suffered a similar fate to the Armada
of 1588 and was shattered by a storm (Dec., 1596).
The Tyrone rebellion necessitated further calls on the
City for men and money. In May, 1597, it was asked
to furnish 500 men, such as Sir Samuel Bagnall might
approve of.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 210b-213b, 216, 217.</p></note> In the following year&mdash;when Bagnall
met with a crushing defeat on the Blackwater&mdash;it
was called upon to supply a further contingent of<pb n="560" /><anchor id="Pg560" />
300 men and to lend the queen a sum of £20,000.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 24, fos. 324b, 325, 329b; Repertory 24, fos. 268, 287,
306; <hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi> 25, fo. 4b. Elizabeth asked for £40,000, but only succeeded
in getting half that sum.&mdash;Chamberlain's Letters, p. 15.</p></note>
In 1599 Elizabeth sent her favourite Essex to conquer
Ireland in good earnest, to prevent the country falling
into the hands of Spain. She at the same time
called upon the City for more soldiers, and borrowed
another sum of £60,000 on mortgage.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25, fos. 34, 47b, 48; Repertory 24, fo. 352b. In July,
1600, a deputation was appointed to wait upon the lords of the council
touching the repayment of this loan.&mdash;Repertory 25, fo. 119b.  It still
remained unpaid in Feb., 1604.&mdash;Journal 26, fo. 163b. By the end of
1606 £20,000 had been paid off.&mdash;Remembrancia (Analytical Index),
p. 188; Repertory 27, fo. 278. And by July, 1607, the whole was
repaid.&mdash;Howes's Chron., p. 890.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">A scare in London, July-Aug., 1598.</note>

<p>In the meantime a report again got abroad that a
Spanish fleet was assembling at Brest for a descent on
England. On the 25th July, 1598, the lords of the
council wrote to the mayor calling upon him to see
that some twelve or sixteen vessels were provided
with ordnance and powder for the defence of the
Thames, and the court of Common Council at once
took the necessary steps for fitting out the ships as
well as for mustering a force of 3,000 men, afterwards
raised to 6,000.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25, fos. 74b, 75, 77b-78b, 81, 81b, 82b-84, etc.</p></note> The city's forces and the charge of
the river were confided to the Earl of Cumberland.
Sir Thomas Gerrard had at first been appointed colonel
of the Londoners, "but for an old grudge since the last
parliament they wold none of him."<note place="foot"><p>Chamberlain's Letters, p. 59.</p></note> It was proposed
to throw a bridge of boats across the Thames near
Gravesend, after the fashion of Parma's famous bridge
erected across the Scheldt in 1585, and the court of
Common Council (4 Aug.) gave orders for collecting<pb n="561" /><anchor id="Pg561" /><index index="toc" level1="INSURRECTION OF EARL OF ESSEX." />
"hoyes, barges, lighters, boardes, cordes" and other
material necessary for the purpose.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25, fo. 79b.</p></note> This project
was, however, abandoned in favour of sinking hulks
in the channel of the river if occasion should arise.
Watch was ordered to be strictly kept in the city
night and day, lanterns to be hung out at night and
the streets blocked with chains.<note place="foot"><p>-<hi rend="font-style: italic">Id.</hi>, fos. 80, 80b.</p></note> It had been
rumoured that the Spanish fleet had been descried
off the Isle of Wight, and although the rumour
proved false it caused no little alarm in the city
and gave rise to these precautions.<note place="foot"><p>Chamberlain's Letters, p. 59.</p></note> After a few
days the supposed danger passed away. The fleet,
which had been rapidly got together, and included
twelve ships and thirty hoys furnished by the city
for the defence of the river, put to sea nevertheless,
whilst the land forces were gradually disbanded.<note place="foot"><p>Chamberlain's Letters, p. 61; Journal 25, fos. 81, 84b.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">The abortive insurrection of the Earl of Essex, Feb., 1601.</note>

<p>The administration of Essex in Ireland was a
signal failure, and he made matters worse by quitting
his post without leave and forcing his presence upon
the queen. He had hoped to recover her good grace
by his unexpected appearance. Elizabeth was not
to be thus cajoled. She ordered him into custody,
deprived him of his offices, and, what was of more
importance to him, refused to renew his patent of a
monopoly of sweet wines. Although the earl soon
regained his liberty he could not forget his disgrace,
and his overweening vanity drove him to concert
measures against the government. In 1601 he rode
at the head of a few followers into the city, expecting
the citizens to rise in his favour. The mayor had,<pb n="562" /><anchor id="Pg562" />
however, been forewarned, and 1,000 men were held
in readiness in each ward fully armed for the safeguard
of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25, fo. 238.</p></note> The earl and his band proceeded
to the house of Thomas Smith, in Fenchurch Street,
one of the sheriffs, who had represented himself, or
been represented by others, as able and willing to
further the earl's cause. That the sheriff was thought
by his fellow citizens to have been implicated in
Essex's mad attempt is seen from the fact that within
a week he was deprived, not only of his sheriffwick,
but also of his aldermanry,<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25. fo. 245; Letter Book BB, fo. 85. He was deprived of
his aldermanry of the Ward of Farringdon Without and debarred from
ever becoming alderman of any other ward "for causes sufficiently
made known" to the Court of Aldermen.</p></note> but to what extent he
had compromised himself it is difficult to determine.
Finding the citizens averse to a rising and his passage
stopped by pikemen under the command of Sir John
Gilbert and Sir Robert Cross, who respectively had
charge of Ludgate and Newgate,<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 25, fos. 209b, 213.</p></note> and who refused
to surrender them except to the sheriff in person as
the queen's representative, the earl and his company
hastened to the riverside and returned to Essex House
by water. He was subsequently arrested and committed
to the Tower, together with two of his
accomplices, the Earls of Rutland and Southampton.
Another of his followers, the Earl of Bedford, was
committed for a while to the custody of Leonard
Holiday, a city alderman.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1598-1601), p. 546.</p></note> The queen, who had
shown no more agitation at the news of the attempt
to raise the city than "of a fray in Fleet Street,"<note place="foot"><p>Secretary Cecil to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland and others,
10 Feb., 1601.&mdash;Cal. State Papers Dom. (1598-1601), p. 547.</p></note><pb n="563" /><anchor id="Pg563" /><index index="toc" level1="MOUNTJOY IN IRELAND." />
took an early opportunity of thanking the citizens
and her subjects generally for the loyalty they had
displayed.<note place="foot"><p>Proclamation, dated 9 Feb., 1601.&mdash;Journal 25, fo. 240b.</p></note></p>

<p>A sum of £200 was distributed by the civic
authorities among the officers engaged in the city's
defence, but the two knights at Ludgate and Newgate
refused to accept any gratuity.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 25, fos. 213, 246.</p></note> For a week or more
strict guard was kept at the city's gates, whilst bodies
of troops fully armed were kept in readiness at the
Royal Exchange and Saint Paul's Churchyard in case
of disturbance.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25, fos. 242, 243, 243b.</p></note> Essex was brought to trial on a
charge of treason, convicted and executed (25 Feb.).
Sheriff Smith was made to undergo a severe cross-examination,
but appears to have got off with his
life.<note place="foot"><p>Cal. State Papers Dom. (1601-1603), pp. 16, 26, 89, 90.</p></note></p>

<note place="margin">Mountjoy's conquest of Ireland, 1600-1603.</note>

<p>Lord Mountjoy, who had succeeded Essex in
Ireland, set to work systematically to bring the
country into complete submission. The conquest
was not effected without considerable aid from the
city of London. From 1600 to 1602 the citizens
were being constantly called upon to supply fresh
forces for Ireland.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 25, fos. 137, 161b, 166, 179, 189, 190, 218b, 223, 237,
237b, 262b-265b, 293, 295, 301, 302b, 313b, 315; Journal 26, fos.
16b-19.</p></note> A Spanish force which at length
came to Tyrone's assistance in 1601, and established
itself at Kinsale, was compelled to surrender. The
work of the sword was supplemented by famine;
until at last Tyrone himself was carried in triumph to
Dublin, and the conquest of Ireland was complete.</p>

<pb n="564" /><anchor id="Pg564" />

<note place="margin">The parliament of 1601.</note>

<p>Mountjoy's work could not be carried on without
money, and Elizabeth had been compelled in 1601 to
summon a parliament to obtain supplies. Hitherto
the Puritans, who began in the early part of the
reign to gain a hold in the House of Commons, and
had gradually increased in strength, had been content,
in the presence of a common danger, to refrain from
offering any systematic opposition to Elizabeth's
government. But now that the defeat of the
Armada, the death of Philip II and the firm
establishment of Henry IV on the throne of France
had removed all danger from abroad, they began to
change front. As soon as the House met the
Commons chose Croke (or Crooke), the City's
Recorder, their Speaker, an honour which the City
acknowledged by ordering (3 Nov.) a gift of forty
marks to be made to him.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 25, fo. 296b.</p></note> When the question of
supplies came before the House they were readily
granted, but a bill was introduced to abolish patents
of monopolies, which the queen had been in the habit
of lavishly bestowing upon her favourites by virtue of
her prerogative, and by which the price of nearly
every commodity had been grievously enhanced. It
was in vain that the minority in the House
found fault with the Speaker for allowing the
queen's prerogative to be called in question. The
majority had the nation at its back; and finding
this to be the case Elizabeth, who knew when
to give way, yielded with grace. When a deputation
of the Commons waited upon her and
expressed the gratitude of the House at her concession,
she replied in words full of kindness and<pb n="565" /><anchor id="Pg565" /><index index="toc" level1="THE LAST DAYS OF ELIZABETH." />
dignity, thanking the Commons for having pointed
out her error, and calling God to witness that she
had never cherished anything but what tended to
her people's good, "Though you have had," she
assured them, "and may have, many princes more
mighty and wise sitting in this seat, yet you never
had, or ever shall have, any that will be more
careful and loving."</p>

<note place="margin">The last days of Elizabeth, 1601-1603.</note>

<p>These were the last words addressed by the
queen to her people, and their truth was borne out by
her conduct throughout her long reign. Under her
the country had become united and prosperous. By
the citizens of London she was especially beloved, for
they always found in her a supporter of trade and
commerce. If the Hanseatic towns behaved unfairly
to the merchant adventurers Elizabeth promptly
retaliated upon the merchants of the Steelyard.
She had threatened to close the Steelyard altogether
in 1578, when English merchants were ordered
to quit Hamburg, and twenty years later (1598),
when fresh difficulties had arisen, the threat was
carried out.<note place="foot"><p>Repertory 24, fos. 343, 354; Repertory 25, fos. 165-175. The
Steelyard was re-opened in 1606.&mdash;Journal 27, fo. 66.</p></note></p>

<p>The queen rarely left London to make one of
her many gorgeous progresses from country house to
country house or returned home without some notice
being sent to the city to allow of its inhabitants taking
"the comfort of behoulding her royall persone."<note place="foot"><p>Letter from Sir Christopher Hatton to the mayor, 27 Nov.,
1583.&mdash;Remembrancia (Analytical Index), p. 407.</p></note>
Her love of personal admiration and of handsome
men continued to the last. As late as November,<pb n="566" /><anchor id="Pg566" />
1602, she commanded the mayor and aldermen and a
number of the "best and most grave" citizens to
attend her from Chelsea to Westminster, and the
mayor, knowing her weakness, ordered the livery
companies to choose the "most grave and comlie"
members to join the procession.<note place="foot"><p>Journal 26, fo. 42.</p></note> In the early
morning of the 24th March, 1603, she died at
Richmond, to the sincere regret of the citizens no
less than of the nation at large.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<p>END OF VOL. I.</p>
</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div>
<pgIf output="pdf">
  <then>
      <div>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </then>
  <else>
      <div>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </else>
</pgIf>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19800-tei.txt or 19800-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/8/0/19800/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
